Stop taking life so seriously. No one is
getting out of this game alive. And in
three generations, no one will even
remember your name. And if that doesn't
give you liberation to just drop your
problems for a moment and find some joy,
I don't know what will because there'll
never be a time when there's no problems
in life. And that's why this time in
between Christmas and New Year is a
really wonderful time to plan big dreams
and goals for the year.
>> So, let's talk about that.
>> Chris Williamson is one of the world's
leading podcast hosts and thinkers. And
now he's back
>> educating us on how to build discipline,
turning goals into results, what's
stopping us finding love,
>> and what makes a good man in today's
society?
>> The single [music] best question to work
out what you should be doing next year,
what would have to happen by the end of
2026. For me to look back and consider
it a success and it usually comes down
to only a few things. The first one is
in order to pick something up, you have
to put something down. So setting the
bar unrealistically high does not
increase your performance. Like you
probably lose 20 lb and get a boyfriend.
You can't do that and move cities and
start a new business. So, make the
assumption, I can do no more than I'm
doing now. Second thing, if your life
was a movie and the audience were
watching, what would they be screaming
at the screen telling you to do with
your life? It is obvious. Leave the
relationship. The job is not working for
you. The killer's hiding in the
cupboard. Because if you're not careful
with how you design what it is that you
chase after, you can spend your entire
life realizing that you climbed a huge
ladder that was leaning up against the
wrong wall.
>> And is there anything else? So there is
a wonderful upside in trying to conquer
and trying to achieve mastery, trying to
really drive yourself to go and do
stuff. But I'm not like your feelings,
just hustle and grind until your eyes
bleed either because one of the biggest
lessons I've taken away from this year
is [music] suppression isn't the same
thing as strength. And it's a good thing
for guys who feel their emotions to show
that they feel their emotions, right?
Like I've been at some of my lowest
points over the last 12 months. It felt
like my better self was slipping through
my fingers. I realized my emotions are
legitimate and denying myself that is
not helping anything at all. What
happened?
>> I see messages all the time in the
comment section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you [music]
[singing]
Chris.
My audience care a lot about changing
their life for the better. And I think
at this time of year, change is front of
mind for everybody. Everybody's thinking
about New Year's resolutions, who I want
to become in 2026. But when you look at
the stats, 23% of people quit by the end
of the first week of January, their New
Year's resolution, the thing they aimed
at.
>> Roughly half of people will quit their
New Year's resolution, the change they
sought by the end of January. and only
about 9% of people will keep their New
Year's resolution for the full year. So
I guess my opening question to you is
does this time of year matter at all? Is
it a useful productive time to be
thinking about change in your point of
view? I think the world is split into
two camps. Uh one camp says there is no
difference between January 1st and
December 31st. Like why wait? It's
December 10th, just do it now. and the
other camp likes the idea of there being
a culturally appropriate moment to stop
doing something and start doing
something else. Most people need to
realize that they're already spending
tons of time worrying about the future
in the past. They're going back to this
thing that they regret. I wish I'd done
this differently. Oh, I I have uh uh
rumination about something that
occurred. I have a sense of uh
wistfulness for something that I've
maybe missed. I'm grief for something
that I've lost. Then they're concerned
about the future. They're thinking, "I'm
uncertain about this thing that's going
to happen. I could plan. I could try and
come up with a solution for this." So,
you're already worrying about the past.
You're already doing reflection and
planning just in a very unstructured way
where you don't get to choose when it
hits you in the face.
This is a culturally appropriate moment,
like a scheduling appropriate moment for
you to just step in and think, okay, in
between Christmas and New Year, people
that work in retail, God bless you,
people that got to go back to work and
do that thing, but usually there's a bit
of downtime.
>> It's a little bit slower. It's Boxing
Day, chilling out on the couch, and
you're kind of thinking, "Wow, I was
here again at mom and dad's house or
with the in-laws or whatever. What was I
doing last year? What was it like last
year? You're already in a little bit of
a reflective mode. There is no special
magic super secret squirrel source in
January 1st. But it is a good moment to
check in because life tends to slow down
a little bit. Work tends work uh time is
a little bit more slow and you're
already doing this. You're already
thinking about the past and the future
and this is just a good structured
opportunity to check in and do it. I
guess the the question that everybody
should be asking themselves is what
should I aim at? And and is there such a
thing as aiming at too many things? What
what what is a good goal for change? And
when you think about all the people
you've interviewed and the change you've
seen in your own life, what what does a
productive New Year's resolution or
productive goal sound like? And how do I
how do I get there?
>> Yeah. It's very overwhelming. Uh if you
realize, wow, I can do anything I want.
I could look at my entire life.
That's terrifying. That's absolutely
terrifying.
One thing I would say, this is your
opportunity to change anything
behaviorally. You can change anything
you want. Not everything you want.
Right? That's the problem. You can
become anything you want behaviorally,
but you can't be everything you want.
So, you need to pick a small number. The
single best question to work out what
you should be doing next year. what
would have to happen by the end of 2026
for me to look back on 2026 and consider
it a success. I think that really helps
to just give you a bit more perspective
and it usually comes down to only a few
things. You don't usually have so much
in your mind when you do that. Setting
the bar unrealistically high does not
increase your performance. Imagine this.
Imagine that you went into a buffet and
you made your plate as big as possible.
He said, "I want all of these things.
I'm going to put all of this stuff on my
plate and my stomach is going to expand
to be able to fit it."
>> That's not the way that our stomachs
work and that is not the way that our
workloads work. So, first rule, in order
to pick something up, you have to put
something down.
Don't assume that just because you've
loaded more onto your workload plate,
your work capacity will expand to be
able to fit it into your stomach. That's
not the way that it works.
assume. Make the assumption I can do no
more than I'm doing now. I can switch
stuff, but I can't add more in. Maybe
you can. Maybe you're going to be able
to squeeze your phone time. Maybe you're
going to be able to become more
efficient, more productive, whatever.
But it's safer to just assume this is
the pie that I'm playing with. And in
order to pick something up, I have to
put something down. That's a really
important thing because at the moment
it's December 29th. I'm with I'm full of
gusto and motivation and I can't wait.
I'm going to crush it. And yeah, for the
first week, maybe you've got that. But
if you're using motivation and
enthusiasm to work yourself through your
goals, your goals are predicated largely
on a fuel source that you don't have
control over. Don't have a massive
amount of control over your motivation
over a long amount of time. Like it
comes and then it goes. You want
something that's a little bit more
rigid. So in order to pick something up,
you have to put something down. I think
that's a really important point because
when we think about the goals we'll
start setting at this time of the year,
all of them are asking for more time or
more energy. Like pretty much all of
them ask for I want to start running. I
want to start going to the gym. Whereas,
as you say, that means I'm going to have
to take something off the plate.
>> Yeah.
>> And we don't think about subtraction at
this time of the year. Typically, we
don't think I'm going to spend less time
with my friends. I'm going to cut out
Netflix. We think of addition. Mhm.
>> But logically there's still just just
the 24 hours in a day and that the
finite amount of body budget that we
have in terms of energy. So are you
saying that I have to create both an
addition and subtraction list and make
sure that they equal out they net out to
zero?
>> That would be optimal. I think one
question that you really should be
asking yourself. Let's go through a
bunch of uncomfortable questions people
can ask themselves. That could be cool.
>> Okay.
How would I spend my day if I wanted to
make 85year-old me as miserable as
possible?
>> What is it that I did over the last year
that made me right now
feel
it's this constriction.
>> Okay.
>> I I I don't like I don't like my
relationship with my phone. I spend a
lot of time on my phone. I don't like
how uh my mornings aren't very
productive. Uh I've noticed that when
I'm with my friends, I'm not very
present. I've noticed that I spend a lot
of time on my own. I tend to isolate
when things get difficult. I've noticed
that I've got into the habit of not
telling the truth when people ask me a
question. I've noticed that I've got
into the habit of not advocating for my
needs when I should do. I don't hold my
boundaries sufficiently well. Like, this
is why the reflection part's really
important. So,
what would I do to make 85-year-old me
as miserable as possible? How would I
spend my day? And in what ways am I
already doing that? Well,
a lot of those are going to cross over.
That ven diagram is not going to be as
far apart as you might think it is. I've
heard you ask the question before about
if someone was watching this and it was
a movie. What was that?
>> Yes. I mean I mean it's the this
question is so fantastic.
If your life was a movie and the
audience were watching up to this point,
what would they be screaming at the
screen telling you to do with your life?
They would be it is obvious. Leave the
relationship. The job is not working for
you. The killer's hiding in the
cupboard.
>> [snorts]
>> What would the audience be screaming at
the screen telling you to do with your
life?
>> So, you've asked three questions and I'm
going to ask you those three questions.
>> Okay.
>> So, the first question you asked was
about what would have to happen at
[clears throat] the end of next year to
look back and consider this year a
success. So, for you personally, I want
to spend more time thinking about ideas
and less time caught up of doing admin.
>> Uh admin is a drain on me. I don't enjoy
I don't enjoy emails. I don't enjoy the
operations of that sort of stuff.
>> Spend time making or
>> Yeah, I want to be in maker mode, not
manager mode,
>> would be a way to put it. Uh, I want to
spend more time with my friends. I've
been soloreneur grind set, you know,
pick it up and lift it type thing a lot
for the last forever. More time with my
friends, more time connecting with
people. So,
that's two things. Like, if I can do
that, spend more time with my friends
and less time doing admin. Now, one of
the problems that you have is and I want
to lose 20 pounds and I want to get my
bench press up to 200 kilos and I want
to do this and it's like really like do
you really really really want that?
Because when I think about it, I have
like much more gentle goals have much
broader goals and that's the stuff that
I think is important to me.
>> And if we think about your subtraction
framework, what what are you going to
have to subtract?
>> Well, what's interesting about those is
that actually those aren't necessarily
additions. The friends thing is an
addition, but the executive functioning
thing, the admin burden is not. So,
actually, that's nice because I want to
do less of that thing, which should
hopefully open up a little bit of time.
What would I need to get rid of? I'd
realistically need to get rid of some
time sat in front of my computer doing
boring admin stuff. [gasps] I'd probably
need to spend less time scrolling on my
phone, less time on social media. I
would maybe need to make some sacrifices
in training as well. If I'm going to go
out with my friends a little bit more in
an evening, I'm gonna have to get up a
bit later. So, there's some of the
trades that we're gonna have to make.
>> The other question was around if this
was a movie and the audience was
screaming at you.
>> Mhm.
>> What would they be screaming?
>> You're already doing enough.
You're already doing enough. Stop
whipping yourself into submission,
thinking that your happiness sits on the
other side of the next set of goals that
you're going to achieve. You've already
achieved goals that you said would make
you happy.
So if you haven't made it now, if this
isn't when life is going to begin, then
when when when are you going to start?
There's this uh wonderful idea of the
the deferred life hypothesis. Deferred
life hypothesis is basically the sort of
common belief that our life hasn't yet
begun. That what's happening now is a
sort of prelude. It's an intro to our
life truly beginning. And upon
reflection, what a lot of people realize
is that this prelude that they run
through was a mirage that sort of faded
as they approached and they were
actually just running toward the end of
their life. Like they're permanently
putting things off. I get it. People
have got realistic structural monetary
requirements. They've got to get up.
They've got to go to work. They've got
to [__] change their nappy. They've
got to walk their dog. They've got
things that they need to do. That's not
what I'm talking about. My point is
everybody thinks a lot of people think
in one form or another that my life will
begin when they're holding their
happiness hostage. They're in a holding
pattern like a plane that can't land for
some reason. It's like what if that what
if that never changes? What if your
problems in life are never ever going to
go away? What if problems are always
going to be there? What then? Oh wow.
Well, I'm never going to arrive. That
means I need to start living now. And I
think for me there's definitely a lot of
um I will get there when once the tasks
of today are completed once the problems
are gotten through. There'll never be a
time when there's no problems in life.
Problems are a feature, not a bug.
>> I sometimes wonder if this is a trait of
just human evolution. Like it makes
survival sense for it to be hardwired
into my genetic code to strive to
basically continue to strive like to
continue to conquer to continue to
build. And in fact, maybe if my
ancestors didn't have that, we wouldn't
be sat in a room now with all these
lights and fancy cameras and such
because this is the consequence of a
species that strive. And so I wonder if
this is like the curse of being human,
which is we just endlessly strive and
then we die. And because we did our our
offspring have a higher rate of
survival. And like when I speak to
people from, you know, like East Asian
traditions and stuff, they talk about
being at peace and being at one and
being satisfied and all these things,
but it seems so alien to me to be
satisfied.
>> I I I I think I live in a dichotomy
where I'm like well aware nothing will
change my happiness and then at the same
time I'm completely striving as if it
would. Of course, that's a human
condition. We habituate in both
directions. So if your ancestors had
been satisfied when they got to a cave,
when their family grew and they needed a
bigger cave, when you don't just go and
find one bush, you find a ton of bushes
and then you expand and that gives you
additional security.
>> But unfortunately in the modern world,
that causes us with an infinite amount
of things that we can do and can chase
after. We sacrifice the important for
the urgent. The urgent's always in front
of us. the email, the next meeting.
>> Yeah.
>> And this is again, why should anybody
care about doing an annual review?
Should anybody care about the new year?
Well, you're busy living your life for
almost the entirety of the year. And
this is one moment where the urgent can
just take a tiny bit of a backseat and
the important can come through. Who have
I been over the last year? What do I
want from next [clears throat] year?
Every single year is a chapter of your
life.
for next year. It's chapter 38 for me.
What do I want that chapter to be about?
>> Do you think there's a single a single
change you could make to your life that
would yield the greatest return on
happiness? Like if you could go into
your own hardware
>> and rewrite the code a little bit.
>> I think less striving would actually
make me happier. I think that a lot of
striving and a desire for success comes
from a sense of insufficiency. Like if
only the world recognized my brilliance,
then I will be validated. And it takes a
long time to realize that you don't fix
internal voids with external accolades.
The problem with that is it's an
unteachable lesson. You try and tell
people that money won't fix your
happiness problem or fame won't fix your
self-worth problem. You should see your
parents more. Time in a hammock is never
wasted. You don't love that pretty girl.
She's just hot and difficult to get.
Like all of these things are only
lessons that you can learn once you've
got there. And people who haven't yet
gotten there think, "Well, that's easy
for you to say." And then when they
arrive, for some reason they seem to
evangelize the same insights like
somebody that's just gone through
religious revelation. So either one of
two things is true. People who achieve a
thing are lying about the fact that that
thing didn't fix their problems, their
internal void with external accolades
because of they're part of some cartel
that's trying to pull the ladder up
after they've just gotten in.
>> Or it's the truth, but it's it's an
unteachable lesson. You will not
understand that that thing outside won't
fix your internal void until you get
there. And I I actually think to Naval
quote, it's far easy to achieve our
material desires than to renounce them.
Like if you want a Ferrari, it's much
easier to actually work real hard and
try and like or get some nice car,
whatever it is, so that you learn that
the car isn't the thing that you want
than it is to rid yourself of the desire
for the car overall. And that's not to
say that getting a Ferrari is easy. is
to say that getting rid of the desire is
essentially impossible.
>> I think me and you are probably two guys
that at some deep level had some kind of
internal void. Is that accurate
statement?
>> Of course. Are you speaking in the past
tense?
>> Have. [laughter]
>> Have. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> You've now accomplished so much. You're
like one of the biggest podcasters on
planet earth. You're you're famous.
People know who you are.
>> Biggest in the world talking to second
biggest in the [laughter] world.
Congratulations.
>> But people know who you are. You've got,
you know, money. You've got freedom now.
You can go wherever you want. do
whatever you want. People know who you
are. You get restaurant t reservation
tables.
>> You did it.
>> Is it what you expected? And has has it
actually changed that internal void?
>> The interesting thing is I never
actually thought I was going to amount
to much. I was just I was just really
interested in what was doing what what I
was doing what was in front of me. I
didn't think
this is going to lead to me being some
achieving something or living in America
or whatever. Each different step got me
there. But no, of course not. Of course.
The the the unteachable lesson has
smashed me in the face, which is
fame won't fix your self worth, money
won't make you happy, you should see
your parents more, you can take a day
off. Like all of these lessons, you have
to live them to learn them,
unfortunately. And my last question on
this is when I asked about the change to
your code that you'd make, you talked
about fixing the striving. What's been
the downside of the striving?
>> There's a a common sense of not
enoughness like I will be enough when
right because you can either run away
from something you want or run towards
something uh run yeah run away from
something you fear or run towards
something you want.
>> And what's the consequence of that not
enoughness?
>> It's a sense of lack. It's also a
provisional life. It's putting life off.
I will be
happy, satisfied, peaceful when
>> And is that a thought you have?
>> It's more like an embodied sense. Feel
it. Yeah, I very much feel it. It's this
thriving. It's this pull. It's this sort
of magnetism moving forward.
>> But yeah, dude. Uh if your life was a
movie and the audience were watching up
to this point, what would they be
screaming at the screen telling you to
do? It's usually a very reliable
indicator of where you should be putting
your attention. So, as we think about
next year that the things one should aim
at.
>> Um, what I've heard you I think you said
on the high performance podcast, you
said you're really obsessed with
understanding what success actually is.
>> So, I I also just before we go into the
more practical things,
>> if someone sat at home and I know people
come up to you on your tours and ask you
questions like this a lot, if they're
sat at home trying to figure out what
success actually is for them, is there a
framework or a principle or a method to
figure out what it might mean for them?
I've heard you talk about two ideas
which I love which is the region beta
paradox but also the parable of the
Mexican fisherman which I think both
stayed with me in a profound way. Yeah.
So
three things success region beta uh
Mexican fisherman what success looks
like for any individual person is going
to be different for you knowing that you
really want a family. There's people out
there that like I'm not that fussed. I
don't think that that's on the cards for
me and that's fine. Other people might
really really want to put the workload
down and step off and and go and do the
dad or the mom thing. Unfortunately, you
can't take somebody else's purpose or
success. Like that's that's you can't
wear it as a suit. It's a bad idea,
right? Cuz it's going to not fit. And um
wonderful line, let go or be dragged. If
something doesn't fit, eventually it's
going to hurt wearing it. And that means
if you're not careful with how you
design what it is that you chase after,
you can spend your entire life realizing
that you climbed a huge [__] ladder,
a very, very long ladder that was
leaning up against the wrong wall.
>> And uh you need to ensure that you don't
do that. And this is why we need to just
sit with ourselves, sit with a little
bit of reflection. And that's why this
time in between Christmas and New Year,
I think, is a really wonderful time to
do this. So, how do you work out what it
is that you want to do? the big picture
goals are going to be hard for you to to
get to. But if you just think one year
ahead, what do I want over the next 12
months? I think that usually helps you.
And maybe you want to be in a
relationship. I want to be in a
committed relationship with someone who
really loves me. Okay, now we can start
to talk about a plan to do that. But you
need to have a little bit of silence.
It's like a problem with permanently
being busy stops you from being able to
listen to fleeting thoughts that are in
the back of your mind. Mhm.
>> And that quiet voice is usually the
really powerful one. But
the there's a wonderful line, the
answers you seek are in the silence
you're avoiding.
The answers that you seek are in the
silence you're avoiding.
>> Do you meditate?
>> Of course you do.
>> Yes.
>> No.
>> Yeah. Do you?
>> Do you wish you did?
>> I think the the definition of meditation
is quite blurry because for me when I'm
I I will have a shower for like 30
minutes and all I'm doing in there is
thinking. I'm not cleaning. [laughter]
Like I'm clean after five minutes.
>> I was gonna say it suggests that you
come out of the shower not clean but
with great ideas.
>> Exactly. [laughter]
>> No, but I I I mean you get clean in like
5 minutes, but then I spend the other 25
minutes because there's something about
the waterfalling and the alone time that
drops me into a a spiral of thinking
which I think is my version of
meditation. Then treadmills and the
stepper at the gym.
>> Treadmills are great.
>> Yeah.
>> My version of meditation.
>> Shower thoughts are overrated. Toilet
thoughts are underrated. The other thing
that I I love that you talk about is
what it when we talk about metrics of
success, you talk about observable
metrics and hidden metrics
>> of success.
>> Yeah. So, a lot of the time we'll trade
a hidden metric for an observable
metric. Something that's observable
would be your job title, what your
salary is per year, how many people know
you, your bank balance, the size of your
house, the car that you drive,
>> things people can see.
>> Yeah, of course. The only way that your
success can be judged is outwardly. So
naturally we trade something which
people can't see for something that they
can see. For instance, lots of people
would trade a longer commute for a
higher salary or um
a better job title. One of the problems
that you encounter with that is that the
length of your commute is one of the
most correlated uh stats with your
happiness. Longer commutes reliably make
people more miserable. And what's the
hidden metric that you've lost by doing
that? Well, that's less time with your
family, with maybe your kids that are
growing up, with your wife to connect,
that's less time to pursue your own
passions, even if your job is your
passion. So, what about uh a more
stressful career? Going to move into a
different industry that's way more
stressful, but it pays more observable
metric. What's the hidden metric? What
about the peace of mind that you have as
you go to sleep at night? What about
what that does to your health and the
quality of your relationships and your
ability to be present on a weekend?
because you're not able to turn your
phone off because your last job was 9
to5, but this one is 247.
Well, it's difficult to say because
you're like, people want and need real
resources. I want to improve the quality
of my family. That's a noble thing to
do. But after a while, you have to admit
if you already live a comfortable
quality of life and you trade it,
you you trade your happiness or your
your peace in order to get more,
you're making a bad choice because
you're going to sacrifice something that
you want, which is happiness, peace,
connection for something that's supposed
to get the thing that you want, which is
money, job title, bigger car,
>> which I think links to the story of the
Mexican fisher.
>> Yeah. Parable of the Mexican fisherman.
Uh,
an American businessman was away on a
holiday in Mexico and he got taken out
by a fisherman and he asked the
fisherman, "So, what do you do each
day?" The fisherman said, "I spend each
morning out on the water. I fish a
little. I catch some food. I take it
home and I sit in my house with my wife
and my family and we eat what I've
caught for the day." The American says,
"That's stupid. This a stupid idea. what
you should do is you should get a bigger
boat and then you could catch more fish
and then you could go sell it at the
market. The fisherman said, "Why would I
do that?" So, well, once you've sold it
at the market, you could buy some more
boats and you could get your friends to
come and work for you and then they
could catch more fish and you could
start to sell it wholesale. Fisherman
said, "Why would I do that?" So, well
then you could create a canning factory
and you could export it back to the UK
and you could have a huge business.
Fisherman said, "Why would I do that?"
So well then you would be able to retire
and fish a little on a morning, catch
some fish, and then spend the afternoon
with your family. [laughter]
And it's the same lesson as Paulo Qua's
The Alchemist, which is this young boy
goes on a huge big journey and he finds
out the thing that he was looking for
was in the back garden all along. But
that's an unteachable lesson. And the
big lesson behind The Alchemist is
going on a massive journey to end up
back where you started is not the same
as having never left.
And this is what an unteachable lesson
is. You have to go to the top of the
mountain to get up there and go, "Damn
it.
Damn it." Like, I thought that was going
to be the answer. But now that it's not,
I can rid myself of that. I've crossed
it off. And it's so unpopular. It's so
unpopular to talk about this online
because everybody that doesn't have a
thing assumes that the thing will fix
their problems and that the people who
have got there, achieved it, and say
that it didn't are ungrateful.
like, "Oh my god, the thing that I want
and they're just casting it away." Like,
how dare you? How dare you say that the
thing that I know I want isn't the
answer to my problems.
And yet, reliably,
everybody that gets there says it's not
the answer.
It's very true. I was thinking back to
all the goals that I wrote in my diary
at 18 years old, and then it's no
surprise that that I have none of those
things now. They're all like material
things and outcomes I was looking for.
Let me give you another one. A great
question to reflect on. Knowing what I
know now,
what advice would I give myself 12
months ago?
Do you know what mine would be? Mine
would be around it would be about around
prioritization.
It would really be around the saying no.
Like [clears throat] we we don't really
teach it goes back to what you're saying
about adding and subtracting, but my
life would be much better if I was
even 10% better at saying no to things.
>> Mhm.
>> It would be so much better. I'd be so
much more s upside isn't like 10%
upside. It's like 50 100% upside because
the compounding force of focus.
>> Okay. So that's what advice you would
have given yourself 12 months ago
knowing what you know now.
>> Yeah.
>> Guess what?
>> Well, it's almost certainly what you
need to hear right now.
[snorts]
>> The big problems are the big problems.
In the same way that you've got the feat
that you had a decade ago, the big
drivers psychologically for you tend to
be the same throughout your life. Uh, I
put other people's happiness ahead of
mine. Maybe that showed up when I was a
child and I didn't speak up to mom when
I felt upset because I was worried that
it would upset her. Maybe that happened
when I got into my first job and I
didn't advocate for myself when my boss
was treating me poorly. Maybe that
happens when I get into a relationship
and I'm scared of making my needs known
to my partner because I'm worried that
they're going to reject me or think
lesser of me. When it comes to my child,
I'm terrified to discipline them because
I need their love and I don't want them
to make them upset. This is a single
trend that's occurring throughout your
life and all of the time. One of the
most common questions that people ask is
what would you tell yourself 10 years
ago? Great question to ask. Not because
it's trit, but because it is almost
always the very same thing that you need
to hear right now.
>> What would you have said it 12 months
ago? [sighs]
>> Stop working so hard.
>> Stop working. Take a day off. Take a day
off. Take a day off per week. Put your
phone down. Put your phone down. go
outside, touch some grass, and it's the
same thing now. It's the exact same
thing now.
>> Do you think you're going to accomplish
it? [laughter]
>> I don't know. I don't know, man. I mean,
you know, I'm trying. I'm trying. But
behavioral design, I I've got better.
The one thing that I can say and the
beautiful thing about the end of your um
review, there are some resolutions
which I decided on a decade ago that I
still do now. And I think that's really
cool. So when I'm faced with the
opportunity to plan because I gave
myself a little bit of space, right? And
it never happened. Very few of the
habits that randomly appeared in the
middle of July are ones that I've stuck
with and I really care about. Bad ones
maybe. I maybe accumulated bad habits in
the middle of July, but most of the ones
that I really love that are very
conscious that are aligned with where I
want to go, they're ones that I
consciously designed, right? They're
ones that were done purposefully and
that's always been around a review
period. So, yeah, end of the year is not
special. When else you going to do it,
right? When else are you going to do it?
But yeah, 12 months ago and and 10 years
ago, I was doing the same thing.
Different industry, running nightclubs,
chill out, take a day off. So, what is
this annual review template that I have
in front of me?
>> At the end of each year, you need to
have some sort of a format. Uh, if
anyone wants to go and download it, they
can go to chriswilx.com/re.
It's totally free. They can just copy
and paste it into their notes app of
choice and then fill it in. I realized
that this big question of it's the end
of the year and I need to look back on
it. I want to uh reflect on what went
well and badly and I want to plan my
goals. without a a structure, you're
just like cast out a drift, freewheeling
everywhere, and you have no idea what to
do. So, there's a bunch of questions.
Stuff like, "How has this year gone?
What went well? What went badly? And
why? What lessons did I learn? What
habit or system accounted for most of my
success? What are the most valuable ways
that I spend my time? How can I find
more time for this?" There's a section
for memories. What was the best
surprise, best meal, coolest new
experience, my favorite new city, my
favorite new friend? What was my
favorite day or my most intense day? Was
the best sex I had? What's my favorite
quote and song and artist? And then
there's a plan. What would I do this
year if I wanted to make 85-year-old me
miserable? What are the things I do to
make my day go great?
What do I think is productive that
isn't?
What is productive that I don't realize?
Those are two big ones.
>> Mhm.
And then there's some final thoughts.
What would have to have happened by the
end of next year to look back and
consider it a success? Who do I need to
become for the next chapter of my life
to go the way that I want? Knowing what
I know now, what advice would I give
myself 12 months ago? So for the people
that are frantically taking notes, they
can just go to chriswallex.com/re. And
this is this is available for free.
>> You mentioned there that goals you set
10 years ago are still some of your most
important today.
>> Mhm.
>> What are those goals that you cherish
the most? Habits, goals that you cherish
the most that you you set out to
accomplish 10 years ago. So, I reflected
last year on the highest ROI resolutions
that I've ever done. And what I think
would be cool would be if people put the
single best return on investment res re
resolution that they've ever done in the
comments cuz that will create maybe the
biggest repository of the highest value
New Year's resolutions that anybody's
ever had and the best ones will get
updated and the bad ones will be heavily
criticized in the replies. So, that
could be kind of cool. Okay, so that was
an instruction which means if you're
listening right now, leave a comment
below with the resolution you set
yourself at any point in the past that
returned the most for you in any in any
area of your life.
>> You love it the most.
>> And if you agree with someone's, please
hit the like button on their comment,
too. And this should create, as Chris
says, a repository of the most
impactful, highest ROI resolutions.
>> I think that's cool, dude. I want to do
it. I want to know what everyone else's
big resolutions are. So, I'll I'll give
you mine. Okay. No phone in the bedroom
at night. charge it outside.
>> Interesting.
>> It's an instant 15% quality of life
increase.
>> Why?
>> Because when you start your day, if you
use your phone as your alarm, you roll
over, you turn the alarm off, and
immediately you're looking at your
phone. You haven't got up, you haven't
got moving, you're not hydrated, you're
not seeing sunlight in your eyes, you
are
hit in the face by the world telling you
what's happening as opposed to you
having a tiny little microcosm of peace,
this little oasis for you. Now, I get
it. People that have got young kids are
hit in the face by the children, not by
the phone. But even if you do, adding
the phone and the scroll and everything
else on top, that means you're not
present with the kids. So, even if the
kids are a problem, you don't need to
have the phone in there. You wake up, it
means that you're always on the other
side. The world is happening to you.
You're not happening to the world. When
you go to bed on a nighttime, you're
going to be using your phone before you
go to sleep, which means that you're
going to cut into your sleep time.
you're going to be uh in an environment
digitally that's going to make yourself
feel horrendous. It's not good. It's not
good for sleep. Whether it's the blue
light, there's a little bit of research
that seems to say that it's not the blue
light so much as it is the scroll sort
of dopamine trigger adrenal intermittent
schedule reward thing that that's the
the main issue of what's going on. But
it also means if you can't sleep, you
know, you can just roll over and pick
your phone up and now you're two hours
into a YouTube scroll hole. That's who
you truly are. By the way, people think
that who you are is, you know, your
journal entries, your diary entries. No,
no. Who you truly are are the videos
that you watch on YouTube between 10
p.m. and 12:00 p.m. at night when you
can't sleep. That's who you really are.
So, getting your phone and putting it
outside of the bedroom is no cost.
There's no reason to not do it. The only
reason to not do it is somebody needs to
ring you or something like that. I get
it. Maybe you've got kids that are out
late and you need to make sure that
they're okay in case some sort of
catastrophe occurs. Really, there are
very few excuses to not have it outside.
Radio alarm clocks have existed for
forever. Buy a radio alarm clock. Take
your phone cable now and put it in the
kitchen or put it in the living room or
something or put it on the other side of
the room, right? Cuz you don't want to
wake up and charge on your phone. The
it's the single biggest improves quality
of sleep. It means that your mornings
are better. It means that your nights
are better. It means you're less
distracted. It means you spend less time
on your phone. you're forced to do
something even tiny bit more productive
like watch Netflix or read a book or
talk to your partner. It's interesting
because I was thinking about this
through a four quadrant graph
>> drawing a diagram
>> where [laughter] I'll throw it up on the
screen please and make it look better
editing team because this nobody's going
to be able this is not coherent but on
one axis you've got things that are low
effort and on the other axis you've got
things that are high return and this is
right up in the top right which is like
very low effort high return habit yeah
which is probably where one should aim
most but I imagine a lot of us are
aiming at like high effort low return
>> uh morning walk every day
>> okay morning walk slightly higher effort
>> uh The research around this is is
fantastic. Humans obviously pushed this
a lot. Morning sunlight in your eyes,
even if you don't have the sun. Even if
you're somewhere dark and cold and wet,
doesn't matter. Getting up and doing uh
ambulation, so walking through an
environment while your eyes scan left
and right seems to tune down your fear
response. It makes uh your amygdala just
a little bit more calm. So regardless of
whether if there's sunlight, fantastic,
that'll be even better. 5 minutes, 10
minutes. And I know people have got
structural limitations. This is me
assuming that you've got like 20 minutes
on a morning that you could slot this
into. And if you're not waking up with
your phone in your hand, that probably
is the 20 minutes, right? Little walk,
bit of fresh air, just get up, put your
shoes on, get going, just get moving.
You don't need to think. You don't need
to do anything at all. Don't need to
brush your teeth. Get up and go.
Probably need to get to the bathroom,
actually. Get up and go. Uh, no caffeine
within 90 minutes of waking. Just push
your caffeine a little bit later. It
seems like the adenosine system isn't
dominant during the first 90 minutes of
the day. Your adrenal system is.
>> So adenosine is the the receptors that
deal with caffeine and tightness.
>> And tightness. Exactly. And caffeine
binds to it and it stops you from
feeling tired. Salt act on your adrenal
system. So if you use some sort of
electrolyte drink first thing in the
morning, that will help to get that
moving. But the main reason for this,
regardless of the research, most people
have a 100 pm slump, feel a little bit
tired. And I think if you just push that
caffeine a little bit later, just see if
you can hold on. When you wake up, you
should be okayish, just the natural
cortisol, you've gone for a little walk,
you know, you're here we are, the day
has begun. Do you really need a c a
coffee within 20 minutes of waking?
That's what most people's first thing
is. Just see what happens. Test it. See
what happens if you push it back by 90
minutes and see how you feel. At least
for me, I know that that works well.
No alcohol for 6 months. This is a big
one. This is much more high effort for a
lot of people, even people that don't
drink that much. Uh because a lot of the
parties and things that you attend, are
not superbly fun. And some people use
alcohol in order to make their family or
the wedding or the birthday a little bit
more comfortable.
>> A social lubricant.
>> Correct. Yeah, of course. But if you
take alcohol out for about six months,
what it forces you to do is think, do I
really want to go to that party? I'm
actually having to anesthetize myself of
the people that I'm around. Like, if you
can only bear to be around your friends
when you're drinking, that's probably
not a good indication. And if your
friends only want you to be around them
when you're drinking, they're not
friends, they're drinking partners.
So, I think alcohol is a a big qu I just
like it. It just makes me have more fun.
All Hey, I get it. But I think if people
look at it closely, they realize that
they're using alcohol as a bit of a
crutch. They're using it to bolster
themselves in a way. What's interesting
is it's one of those areas where you
don't understand the hidden cost until
you really give it up for a while. And
and I think about my own relationship
with drinking and I stopped drinking at
30 years old. I'm now 33. And I had just
drank because I just drank. I'd never
ran the experiment of just giving it up
for a while. And I and then at like I
don't know maybe I was at 31. I thought,
you know, I'll have a drink again
>> because now I could really AB test it.
I'd had a year of not drinking. Decided
to have a drink again.
>> It ruined three days of my life. I had a
couple of glasses of wine, didn't get
drunk. It ruined three days of my life
because of the the domino effect it
caused. So it meant that I got worse
sleep that night and then because I got
worse sleep that night. I ate more
poorly the the next day because my my
dopamine system or whatever the cortisol
system was all messed up
>> and then I I podcasted worse. I didn't
go to the gym the the day after that
that day or the day after because of
that because I felt really bad. I then
slept worse and I could track all of
this on my weight. Hashtag ad
hashtagsponsor hashtag investor
whatever.
>> Bye.
>> Yeah. And I was like, "Oh my god, those
three glasses of wine had this hidden
domino effect that I must have been
living with for my whole life."
>> Dude, so many people want to build
habits. They want to build meditation
routine. They want to go to the gym more
consistently. They want to improve their
eating habits. They don't realize that
the thing that's stopping them from
doing that is sat at the bottom of the
glass of wine that they have four nights
a week. It's tough. Some people are able
to do it and they don't mind. The
costbenefit ratio for some people is
great. I'm just saying try just try try
six months. The reason that you need to
put an end date on it is that you have
it's like running a race where you know
that there's a finish line. If there's
no finish line, it's really hard to run
the race. How are you motivating
yourself to get there? I think that 90
days would be the absolute minimum. 30
days isn't long enough. You need longer,
right? And especially given that the
hardest bit is the start, which means
that you've paid all of the pain at the
very beginning to not actually get any
of the benefits of this being my new
habit.
>> Do it [clears throat] with an
accountability buddy. Do it with your
partner. Say, "Hey, I listened to those
two British idiots talk about how not
drinking might be a good idea." Why
don't we do that? Why don't we try going
sober until July? You haven't missed the
summer, right? The summer's just about
to kick in. So, if you think, "Oh, I
can't wait to get back to drinking." You
can have a a beer in a beer garden.
a huge proportion of people will not
want to go back to drinking. They'll do
it, take time off, get into it, and
realize
I actually don't like this. I love the
fact I got more
reward from building good habits, from
now having a meditation practice, from
now getting up on time, from being able
to go to the gym more. I've become more
dependent on that than I ever was on the
alcohol. This is an idea you when we
talk about habits and when we read these
habit books, we we're often aiming at
like the ninth domino in a set of
dominoes.
>> And I was just thinking then like the
conversation probably needs to start
with what are like the foundational
things. What is the first domino?
Because we know from science that what I
choose to eat is heavily impacted by my
hormone balance today and my hormone
balance is impacted by my sleep, my
emotional regulation, all these things.
A lot of people aim at domino number
nine and think, "Oh, we'll change that
one." Having no idea that actually this
is downstream from a set of other
foundational decisions. And you know,
even as someone that sits here with
scientists and experts all the time, if
my like core state isn't good,
the chance that I'm going to pick the
right thing or go to the gym is
extremely low. Being smart is basically
pointless unless you're at peace.
Like [clears throat] any amount of
intelligence can be overridden by ego or
insecurity or immorality or bad
incentives or impatience or poor sleep.
>> Yeah, sleep is, as far as I can see,
just it's the the pebble at the top of
the avalanche. It's the gateway drug to
everything else being horrendous. Your
caffeine use is impacting your sleep.
Your phone use is impacting your sleep.
Your alcohol in an evening time is
impacting your sleep. If you think that
you drink in order to go to sleep,
you're not sleeping. You're sedating
yourself. Okay. So, if we can sort the
sleep out, how many other things open
up? But you don't sort the sleep out.
You sort the caffeine intake out and you
sort the nighttime phone use out and you
sort the drinking out and then oh my
god, I've got all of this extra
willpower. The thing that I thought was
the issue, which was I kind of always
feel a bit tired and sluggish on the
morning or I always want to eat salty
foods around midday or I always, you
know, always just can't think too
straight for the first couple of hours.
It's like the problem might be hiding at
the bottom of the glass.
>> We think the cause is actually a
symptom. I just noticed this because you
know when I I changed a couple of core
foundational things like exercise and
sleep, everything became everything was
lubricated.
>> What's your highest ROI New Year's
resolutions?
>> Oh, my highest ROI New Year's resolution
was actually a change in a previous
resolution. So my previous resolution in
2017 was I'm going to go to the gym
every day.
Ended up being a terrible resolution,
>> a horrendous resolution. [laughter]
>> Yeah. So 2017 it was go to the gym every
day and I got about four or five months
in, I missed a day, the resolution's
done because it was a it was a
completable resolution in an area of my
life where I didn't I need an
incompletable resolution. So 2018, my
resolution became consistency in the
gym.
>> And this is when everything changed
because consistency is a a goal I get a
shot at every day irrespective of what
happened yesterday.
>> And I've got the rule. I've got the
rule. Let me give you the rule.
>> Okay.
>> This is from all of the habit stuff.
James Cle has been on my show. I think
he's been on your show too.
>> Yeah, he has.
>> Yeah. Uh best habit book of all time,
Atomic Habits. Of all of the things,
there's only two that have really,
really, really stuck. This is the best
rule when it comes to habits. Never miss
two days in a row. Like you are not
going to be able to go to the gym every
day. There will be one day when an
absolute catastrophe occurs. You ate
some dodgy sushi last night.
You can't go. But what you have is
one missed day is an error. Two missed
days is the start of a new habit.
And it alleviates this all or nothing
mentality that we all have. If you put a
packet of biscuits in front of me and
you, we say, "You can have none of them
or you can have all of them." Easy. Tell
me to have two of them. [__] you, dude.
I'm not going to have two. No one has
two biscuits, right? You have all of the
biscuits or you have none of the
biscuits. And that's kind of humans are
absolutist creatures. Like think in
extremes.
>> Yeah. Going to be super super dialed in
on my diet and it's going to be great
and I'm going to get up and do my
meditation and do the rest or I'm going
to go full DGEN mode and I'm partying
and it's a beaather and so on and so
forth. Like there is no middle ground
really with this and that means that
small errors can snowball into complete
uh demolitions of the habit. But if you
just think okay at some point this year
I'm going to miss it. And the rule is if
I missed it yesterday I have to do it
today. And that alleviates your issue
which was I cranked it for the first
couple of months and then one day came
in and I thought h and then the second
day and then I thought well this is just
me now.
>> The other trap that I've noticed in that
is one of my friends had great success
with a new habit with going to the gym
for like three or four months. He he
messages us in the group chat. He says I
finally cracked it. I finally figured
out how to do this. And I said to him at
the time, I said, "Listen, mate. Like
the best the best thought I've ever had
that's made my habits be consistent is
the realization that you never crack
it." And actually thinking about the day
when I fall off the horse and what my
strategy is for getting back on the
horse. Like being really really
cognizant of the fact that at some point
I'm going to eat the sushi and it's
going to [__] up my belly or [laughter]
or I'm going to be on a flight from
Australia and I'm going to land and it's
going to be midnight. And like having a
strategy to get back on the horse and
this just deep belief that you never
crack any habit
>> has been the single most important thing
for me being consistent because when it
happens and I feel unmotivated and that
guilt can creep in and say you [__]
it. I have a I was expecting this.
>> Yes. Of course it's not a a bug it's a
feature.
>> Yeah.
>> This was the price of entry. It's the
cost of doing business of trying to do
behavior change that it's not always
going to work. Mhm.
>> Um, another one, another great uh
resolution, 10-minute walk after every
meal.
>> Interesting.
>> Huge, huge ROI, dude. Crazy. So, it's
called a postprandial walk. Um, and what
it does is it helps to regulate glucose.
It gets your blood sugar moving. Your uh
stomach because of the contrlateral
movement of how your arms and your legs
work, the muscles actually cross across
your stomach, which helps you to digest
food. You know, you have a huge big
meal, you're having a great
conversation, and you sit there and
you're like, "Uh, I mean, this
conversation's so great, but I feel
awful. This this sucks." You just after
you go out for dinner, uh, if you got a
lunch break from work, eat your food,
10-minute little walk. Again, I
challenge people to do it and not say
that it makes them feel really good. You
go for dinner, you're with a friend,
you're out with a partner, you're
meeting somebody for the first time.
Say, "Hey, do you want to why don't we
have a little stroll?" Sometimes it's
gonna be freezing outside, whatever. You
know, do what you can. Let's go for a
little stroll. Makes a huge difference.
Huge difference.
>> What about matters of productivity?
>> Do you think much about this? Because
again, this time of year, people are
thinking about procrastination,
productivity. They're trying to get more
done. They're trying not to doom scroll
so much, be on Netflix, waste time. And
I think a lot of the guilt does come
from feeling like we're unproductive.
>> Absolutely. Yeah. There's a wonderful
idea called productivity dysmorphia. So,
it's the inability to see your own
success.
It's like uh to acknowledge the volume
of your own output. So it sits at the
intersection of burnout, imposttor
syndrome, and anxiety.
It's you think of it like ambitions
alter ego. Basically like the pursuit of
productivity spurs us to do more while
robbing us of the ability to savor any
of the successes that we achieve along
the way. So first off, people are not
particularly good judges of how
productive they are. I think so many
people are whipping themselves into
submission saying you're not doing
enough because in the past that
motivated them to do more.
>> Yeah. And after a while you have to
accept I'm I'm doing quite a lot. And if
you were an athlete on a sports team and
your coach only ever pointed at you when
you made a bad play, you wouldn't feel
particularly motivated by that. But a
lot of people have this sense of
productivity debt. They wake up every
day feeling as if they're already
behind. And only if they dominate their
entire day perfectly can they drag
themselves back up to some minimum level
of acceptable output. And only then can
they go to sleep that night without
feeling like a loser. This means that
you your set point is loss and the best
thing that you can do if you crush the
day is get to a draw. You never win. And
then there's this sort of weird drill
sergeant in the back of your mind that's
saying, "All right, you can have a
little bit of a break now, but just so
you know, soon as you wake up in the
morning, it's all going to happen
again." And you know, I'm speaking to a
very particular type of of mindset here
that there is a huge cohort of people on
the internet who do need David Gogggins
screaming in their face, telling them to
go harder and sort their life out.
The sort of people that listen to your
show and listen to Modern Wisdom are
probably not in that camp.
>> Do you know what's surprising? I am in
that camp. I'm in the camp of
productivity dysmorphia.
>> Mhm. Of course you are. Why is that
surprising? [laughter] Look at what
you've built. How could you not do that
with if you were seeing how much you
did?
>> I can't really think of many days. And
just for context, when I wake up in the
morning till, you know, 2 2 a.m. at
night, I'm working. But I can't think of
many days or really none none come to
mind where I've I've got in bed and
thought you were productive today.
[__]
>> crushed it.
>> You met the standard
>> productivity debt.
>> Yeah.
>> You woke up feeling like you're already
behind
>> 100%. Because of yesterday and the week
before and the month before and the
to-do list.
>> You see you see your own shortfalls from
a front row seat, right? And this is one
of the curses of people who have big
dreams, goals for themselves. the the
size of their goals is always greater
than their ability to deliver them. And
we assume that by having very very very
high standards for ourselves that that's
what what is it? Um shoot for the stars
and even if you don't get it, you'll end
up on the moon. Something like that.
>> Yeah. Whatever. Um that's great for a
while and it's very good at the
beginning of your journey,
>> but after a while I think you just need
to give yourself a [__] break, dude.
Like people are
destroying themselves in this perpetual
sense of not enoughness. They're always
chasing the next thing. So that's all of
that is for me to say that people uh
want productivity, desire productivity.
I'm just trying to say you're probably
working real hard as it is. That being
said, how much do I think about
productivity and how can we like twist
the the knife a little bit more to give
people some some tools?
Best question to ask yourself. Uh, if I
could only achieve one thing today,
start of every day, if I could only
achieve one thing today, what would that
be? You're only allowed to do one thing.
And it's the big thing. It's usually the
scary thing. It's usually the thing that
you probably don't want to do. How many
times does someone go and clean the
cupboard in the kitchen that hasn't been
touched for 6 months? Rearrange. I'll
rearrange all of the plates because they
don't want to have that conversation
with their boss because they don't want
to face that particular piece of work
which is like big and scary and I don't
really know how to tackle it, how to
begin. you will do everything that
doesn't need to be done in order to
avoid the one thing that does. It's
because it's a big scary task that
people will endure months, years,
decades of misery to avoid a couple of
days of pain. And that makes sense. It's
a good trade in some ways, but over time
you're going to accumulate an awful lot
of discomfort.
>> Reminds me of what Nael said when I
interviewed him about procrastination is
the avoidance of discomfort. Um, and he
really said that most of human
motivation is just the avoidance of
discomfort because I I tried to test his
idea. I was like, "What about having
sex? That's surely the pursuit of
pleasure." He was like, "No, you get
horny, which is a form of discomfort and
in order to alleviate it, you go and
have sex where you pursue." But he said,
"All all of our behavior is driven by
discomfort." So, in your example of I've
got a big I've got to start the
manuscript for my new book, but I end up
cleaning the house. It's cuz
>> sounds like a personal example.
>> No, but it is. It's like, you know, I
remember how long I procrastinated on
starting my new book because it's like
being stood at the foot of Mount Everest
starting a book. It's huge.
>> When you think about procrastination,
which is part of pro becoming more
productive,
>> what what in your mind are the causes of
me me avoiding the thing that I should
be doing? As far as I can see, there's
two main reasons for procrastination.
The first one is you don't know what to
do. So, you have this big book in front
of you, but nobody's ever written a
book. they've written a sentence and
then that sentence has accumulated over
time into pages and paragraphs and then
a book appears or you've reviewed a
book, you've looked at the edit, you've
made a decision about the color for the
front cover, but you do what's called a
next action from uh getting things done,
David Allen's productivity strategy.
People want a really really great
productivity strategy. Getting things
done by David Allen is is about as good
as you can get.
You do a next action. So, I'm
procrastinating over a task. What is the
next physical action that I can do that
pushes me toward that goal? I need to
write an email. Well, you better go and
open your email client. Right? If you
don't have your email client open, it is
impossible for you to send the email.
Well, actually, before that, I need to
sit down at my desk. Actually, before
that, I might need to put my pants on.
Okay, pants are on. Hooray. I'm moving.
I'm down at the desk. All right, there
we go. I opened Instagram. [__] Okay,
close Instagram. Email client. That's
the next action. So any bit, what is it
like? Uh completing a marathon is just a
ton of steps one in front of the other.
Like it's just one foot in front of the
other. Do this really really big thing
by breaking it down into small chunks.
That's the first reason in my opinion
for procrastination.
>> Before we move on to the second thing,
it reminds me of something Jordan
Peterson said to me about um why people
don't change their life. He said people
don't change their life because the
first steps to doing so are so embar so
small that it's like embarrassing.
Correct. And he told me the story of a
guy who he was trying to get to change
his life. This person wouldn't leave
their bedroom. Plates stacked to the
ceiling, messy bedroom. And on day one,
he walks in, they put a vacuum cleaner
in there, they do nothing else. Day two,
they come back, they plug it in, nothing
else. Day three, they come back, they
turn it on, nothing else. And by the end
of the 30 days, this guy is out of his
bedroom, his room is clean, and he's out
in out in the world, which he was scared
of. And it always made me think like the
the first step to real change isn't some
great leap which is going to cause huge
cognitive dissonance and discomfort. It
is often so embarrassingly small that we
don't think it's consequential.
>> Yeah.
>> And I think about that with my life all
the time. I'm like actually maybe the
first step here is just like
buying buying a notepad,
>> you know, to start writing my book.
There is definitely a sense that
focusing our attention on a small step
kind of reveals the smallalness of our
lives that like, oh my god, I said that
I I sat down at my desk. like how
pitiful is this really how small I've
become. I should have this big cathedral
of achievements and monumental stuff.
You go, well, yeah, but how do you get
there? We got to lay the first break.
Um, so humility, being humble and uh
compassionate to yourself. Okay, I I I
did a thing today. I went for a walk,
felt like crap. I ate this bad sushi
last night and I, you know, I did one
thing did one thing, one small thing
that moved me toward my goal. So anyway,
>> maybe that's because we never get to see
that first small step. We get to see the
outcome. So if I'm thinking about
becoming a podcaster and following in
your footsteps,
>> I see you've got this [__] digital
screen with where you've got Matthew
McConnA sat in the set of
>> I do
>> his movie and I'm thinking, "Fuck, God,
that's a long [laughter] way to go."
>> Well, the beautiful thing about a lot of
stuff on the internet is that uh it is
archived for the rest of time. So you
can go back and watch my first ever
episode, which is me in my old office
for the nightclub stuff that I did. And
my business partner yelled at me
afterward because I kicked everybody out
so that I could record. And he's like,
"You can't keep doing this. It's not
your studio. It's our office." And it's
a single iPhone and a Blue Yeti USB mic
that looks like a big white dildo. And
it's up and over the top of the desk.
And it's me and a friend from the gym
talking about how we might row the
Atlantic one day.
>> Embarrassing to start there for someone
that's watching you do Matthew McConnA
in a digital screen. It's embarrassing,
>> but also not because that was the first
step. But that wasn't the first step.
The first step was deciding what name it
was going to be and then driving to
Gates Head to buy the Yeti secondhand
from some dude on eBay and that Yeti
went on to do 500 episodes of my podcast
and then we changed to nicer microphones
or something. So everybody's journey
begins embarrassingly small. And I think
just having a little bit of compassion
for yourself, having the humility to go
the first step that I do is going to be
so small that it it almost wouldn't
register on the ledger of
accomplishments. It would be minute
going, okay, that's still a win. First
thing, you don't know what to do. Second
thing, you know what to do, but you
don't know how to do it. So you can sit
down in front of the spreadsheet and you
know that you've got to do a VLOOKUP on
this spreadsheet. We have no idea how to
do a VLOOKUP. What's VLOOKUP? It's some
like some Excel thing that Excel nerds
will know. Um Chat GPT, Google, ring a
boss, ring a friend that is an expert in
Excel. So for me, when I look at my
procrastination, it occurs due to
usually one of two things. Poorly
defined next physical action. I don't
know exactly what the next smallest step
is that moves me toward my goal. I do
know that and I sit down. I don't know
how to do it. Like how do I like if you
don't know how to open a file, you don't
know how to unzip a file. Doesn't matter
how many files you've got in front of
you. If you can't unzip them, you can't
see them. So, okay, I need to learn. Hey
dude, I got this zip file. Where do I go
to get it? Oh. Oh, okay. Thank you. And
then we've got moving. So, it's either a
uh action issue or a skill issue. And
both of those are usually pretty simply
fixed. I was reading your newsletter,
you talk about how some people
procrastinate because they're scared of
what they'll find out about themselves.
>> Mhm.
>> If they try the thing, and I thought
that's so true.
>> Yeah. I mean, if you The upside of never
trying is never having to feel the pain
of failure,
>> right? If you never face that
discomfort, like if I tell myself that
all women are terrible, then I'm excused
of ever having to talk to a woman and as
a result I never have to feel the pain
of rejection. If I tell myself that
everything is [__] or that things will
never get better, I'm excused of ever
having to try anything. It's more
comfortable to get fatalistic and call
it pragmatism. like the cope is framing
hope as pathetic and embarrassing and
optimism as delusion. This is cynicism,
right? Cynicism. And uh the opposite of
that is enthusiasm. Since moving to
America, I've been surrounded by very
enthusiastic people. Americans kind of
have permanent firstline cocaine energy.
[laughter]
[snorts]
And uh I like enthusiasm. I wish I
could, you know, export some of it back
to the UK. You know what I was really
disappointed by? I mean, you featured in
an article recently in a very well-known
British paper. Maybe this came across
your desk or maybe not.
>> No, [laughter] I have no idea.
>> Okay. So, it was uh it was the same week
that the Spotify rap came out. Yeah.
>> And in the top 10 in the world, there's
me, you and J Shetty. There's three
Brits. I think we're punching above our
weight.
>> Yeah. %
>> with regards to this lady who wrote this
article basically said it was a
rejection of our patriotic inheritance
that we were trying to do
self-improvement at scale like whatever
happened to the British stiff upper
lipness where we sort of feel stoically
satisfied in our own loneliness and
misery that's like an almost an exact
quote
>> really
>> yeah it was really it really made me sad
and it made me sad for a few reasons
first stuff. The UK is not exactly
showering itself in glory at the moment.
There is an entire content bucket of
American streamers reacting to news from
the UK and going, "Oh, the downfall of
the UK with the whatever." Whether
that's true or not, the optics aren't
great coming out of the UK at the
moment. And you've got three people who
have done it. I don't know whether Jay
is from workingass, but I'm from as
workingass as workingass can be. I know
that you're like even lower than me
somehow. Congratulations. and wherever
Jay's from, and you've managed to get
these three guys who are genuinely
trying to make the world a better place,
really working hard at it, and your main
takeaway was not during a time where the
UK is kind of eating [__] on the global
stage. Congratulations to three people
who can show young entrepreneurs, people
that want to do personal development,
improve their own lives, that maybe you
can do it, too. And maybe we all got
lucky. I don't know. But it made me real
sad to read that. And this isn't just
that. I was like, it would have been
nice if the the UK like UK press had
backed us and said, "Good on you guys."
But on top of that, it just reminded me
of a a mindset in the UK that
kind of has like Stockholm syndrome for
their own sad moments, for their own
like zero sum like tall poppy thing. And
I really don't like the tall poppy
syndrome in the UK. And uh it made me
sad to to to read that. If I had one
wish for people in the UK and if you're
listening now there's a high possibility
you're in the UK is
lift people up and be positive like clap
for strangers. If someone does something
if someone falls flat on their face in
the pursuit of a big goal clap for them.
Go that was amazing. At least you tried
because their success paves the way for
us all to fail and fall flat on our
face. But right now there's a bit of an
inversion of that. I was in San
Francisco last week and I swear to you
one woman came up to me. She told me
three times she had failed at her
startup. She's now back living with her
mom. And she wore it like a credential
in a badge of honor because in that room
it is.
>> But back home that's a hit piece. That's
[laughter] a hit.
>> Look at this stupid delusional woman who
tried to do this thing. It's evidently
not going to work. How embarrassing.
>> Oh yeah. She she's her employees have
been let go. She owes this money. All
these things. It would be framed as a
negative. And actually when I read the
thing the the Spotify top 10 thing. Yes,
we're all doing self-improvement stuff.
But for me, that's kind of beside the
point. We we built media businesses and
there's not a lot of in terms of
competing with America and competing
with the rest of the world. It's crazy
that three British entrepreneurs managed
to contend with the United States, the
home of media, more capital, more brand
partners, more access to talent,
everything is here it seems. And for for
three Brits to do that, I was so proud.
I I actually don't need anyone to tell
me like to be like I was so proud of
you. I was so proud of Jay because that
is um it's a real underdog thing and
many of us started a lot later than the
people that
>> you know the Indiana Jones movie where
he's like running and the big door is
coming down the big stone door and it's
coming down real slow and he's running
running running. He slides underneath
and he grabs his hat as he comes in. I
kind of feel like that was us in the
podcasting WORLD. WE JUST SNUCK IN
before the sort of explosion and and you
know we rode uh rode the the the
increase in platform size. But yeah,
look dude,
having people around you that genuinely
are prepared to watch you take big
swings is something I wish I could gift
to the UK. Like the way that I would put
it is
Americans want you to succeed in case
you take them with you on the journey.
Mhm.
>> And [clears throat]
the worst parts of British culture don't
want you to succeed in case you leave
them behind.
>> And I I know that there are so many
people that this is just a mimemetic
issue that if you had one key mover
within a group that that would start to
spread and spread and spread. But to the
people in the UK that are doers and are
builders and are actually making stuff
happen, like you have one of the hardest
jobs in the world, cuz not only have you
got to get over the lonely chapter, the
challenge, the difficulty, the
procrastination, the getting up early,
I've got to stop drinking, caffeine 90
minutes after waking, holy [__] there's
so much on my plate, you have this
additional gravity of a culture that
doesn't tend to celebrate success and
risk-taking in quite the same way. So,
if that's you, I think like power to
you. I I really do. and there is a
community of people out there even if it
feels lonely. Now,
>> what do you think of the UK versus US
conversations generally? Do you think
it's really as bad as you hear on X or
on social media? Do you think the UK is
really as doomed?
>> I don't know, man. I mean, I hesitate. I
don't like to throw a ton of shade at
the country that I left three, four
years ago now. Uh because it does feel a
bit like pulling the ladder up after I
got you the last lifeboat off the
Titanic and me going like sorry I
[snorts] had my problems while I was
there. I had I had my my criticisms of
the UK while I was still in the UK. I
wish that people were more positive
some. I wish that there was less tall
poppy syndrome. I wish that risk was um
more celebrated. You know, we have the
same number of universities in the top
10 in the world as America,
>> but we produce 80% fewer entrepreneurs.
>> And what is entrepreneurialism? It's
like vision. It's risk-taking. It's
being prepared to do something that
hasn't been done before. and uh that
maybe there's some something else I'm
not seeing that's a part of the maybe
it's the weather you know maybe it's the
fact that we're a waterlocked island or
that the population density is 10 times
that of the US but there's something I
feel like bottom up that's putting a bit
of a restriction on people and and and
yeah it was a shame it was a shame to
see that the UK press was
just living out the exact cultural
script that I assumed that they would
Um, shame. Shame.
>> Do you know something I've noticed? Most
commercial teams aren't tested by their
targets. They're tested by the weight of
the admin that comes with every client.
All the follow-ups, all the meetings,
all the notes, the timelines that never
ever stop. These were a constant source
of friction in my commercial team until
I introduced our sponsor, Pipe Drive. If
you're not familiar, Pipe Drive is a
simple but powerful sales CRM that gives
you visibility on any deals through a
sales pipeline. It also automates a lot
of the tedious, repetitive, and
timeconsuming tasks that come with the
sales process. I've used it across my
investments for almost a decade now,
even when I was at Social Chain. And
it's so effective in part because it's
customizable. We've been able to tailor
it for different teams depending on how
they work. Pipe Drive also scales with
your business. And you can also link it
to over 500 different apps. It is hands
down my favorite CRM tool. Try it right
now for free for 30 days. No credit card
or payment required, just using my link
below. Or you can go to piperive.com/ceo
to get started. That's
pipederive.comceo.
Productivity. Have we closed off the
book of uh things that really one of the
things I've read in your newsletter as
well as relates to productivity is just
this idea that a lack of confidence
kills more dreams than a lack of skill.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> And confidence I think is maybe one of
those big foundational things that sits
at the very top of the stack of dominoes
to be able to do anything which is like
do I actually believe I'll be able to?
Mhm. Well, let me give you this. Uh,
I think a lot of people assume that
self-belief is kind of the answer to
what it is that they're looking to do.
You can just do things.
You can just do it anyway.
You can do it tired.
You can do it with no self-belief.
You can do it when you don't want to.
You can do it when you think it's not
going to work. You can just do things.
And I've learned that you can have no
self-esteem and show up anyway.
You can have no self-belief and things
still go well. Ryan Holidayiday says,
"Self-belief is overrated. Generate
evidence."
[__] yeah. I want evidence.
Want an undeniable stack of proof that I
am who I say I am. And I I am I am the
poster boy for imposter syndrome, dude.
Like I I never assumed that I would
amount to really anything,
but I'm pretty stubborn. And being
stubborn has meant that I've just kept
showing up. And uh that stubbornness
feels even more in reach than
consistency. Consistency is pretty in
reach, right? Don't miss two days in a
row. All right. Well, [__] write
write 500 words a week. Start a Substack
and write 500 words a week. You can
probably do that. You can probably find
500 words a week. It'll take you half an
hour. Write 500 words a week. After a
year, you're a writer. Congratulations.
You're a writer. You have the license to
be able to call yourself a writer. How
fantastic. And then who knows in four
years time you've got Penguin came
knocking. Maybe there's a book deal for
you. How fantastic with that? I'm a
published author with Penguin. How
fantastic is that?
But it starts by just going
I'm going to see what happens if I do
this little thing.
>> So interesting as you said that I
thought you know what when I started I
had no evidence. Definitely didn't have
belief that I could do what I've done
over the last sort of 1015 years of my
life. But I also had no choice because
of that internal void. [laughter] So
>> yeah,
>> I had no evidence but no choice.
>> That's the that's the region beta thing
that you mentioned earlier on. So um the
region beta paradox. Imagine that if you
were going to travel less than a mile,
you'd walk it. If you're going to travel
a mile or more, you would drive it.
Paradoxically, you would travel 2 miles
quicker than you would travel one mile.
You jump in the car. And what this
suggests is that if we only act when
things cross a certain threshold of
badness,
worse things can be better than better
things. So for instance, the person who
lives in an apartment and it's in a kind
of a sketchy area of town and there's a
little bit of mold on the ceiling and
the housemates's kind of a bit weird,
but it's really cheap and they quite
like the bed and it's not too far from
their work. Uh, someone's in a
relationship and their partner's not
abusive or mean to them, but they're not
really that fired up and don't really
see that much of a future with them. Or
the person who's got a job and their
boss is a bit of a dick and it doesn't
pay that well, but it's really cushy and
they don't actually have to work that
hard. All of these people would be
better off if their situations were
worse because it would galvanize them to
go and do something. And this zone of
comfortable complacency that people get
into is where they can sit for a very
long time. And this is a really
dangerous one. Things aren't bad enough
to be bad, but they're nowhere near good
enough to be good. And this
sort of gray zone, this liinal space,
this sort of like productivity purgatory
that you sit in just sort of allows you
to keep moving forward. You're not
moving toward what you want, but there's
not enough discomfort to get you to do
it. One of the most uh spicy questions
that's been asked at one of my live
talks about this was um should I
purposefully make my life worse so that
it kicks me out the bottom of region
beta? I'm like it's a high-risisk
strategy. I wouldn't I wouldn't
recommend it but it is a difficulty.
>> As you were saying that I was thinking
about how our relationship with that
uncertainty is going to define our lives
and that a lot of people are choosing
certain misery over the uncertainty that
you'll encounter as you go and search
for more. And I always almost almost
imagine it as being stood on the edge of
a cliff and the part of the cliff I'm on
is illuminated. I know it. It's not
great, but I know it.
>> And then I look off into the the abyss
and I've got to jump into this
uncertainty. I don't know if there's
land there. I don't know what what's in
there. And I think people's relationship
with with uncertainty defines their
entire life. Like can you quit when it's
meh?
And I look back on my life and go, if
there is one defining skill, maybe
because of of this sort of internal
void, it's been not overstaying my
welcome by many days in a situation
>> that pushes back against your I say yes
too much. It seems like you do have the
capacity to be able to quit when
>> Oh, yeah. But it's it's I mean, so these
are like big life decisions. And what
I'm talking about when I say I don't say
no enough is like
gradual clutter. Right.
>> Gradual clutter being uh you start
starting a newsletter when I have no
time to write. Whereas when I'm thinking
about this uncertainty, it's like went
to university, lasted a day, never went
back.
>> Walked in, thought this is like school
where where I failed, never went back.
Built a company, was going well, raising
investment, very successful, quit out of
the blue, started this other company
called Social Chain. Did that up until
the age of 27. 10 days before we're
about to go on this IPO road show for
the company to up this to a new stock
market reached this point where I'm like
even though my entire identity is this
social chain guy and even though we're
about to raise this money and the
company would eventually rally up to
what being worth 4 500 million on the
Frankfurt stock exchange
I'm going to jump off into nothingness
I'm going to leave it all with no plan B
and that's when I reflect on my life and
go oh like in the big moments I've not
required I've not needed certainty what
I've needed is uh realization that this
certain misery is not what I want.
>> That's brave. Do you know what I'm
saying? Like I I look at people's
decisioning and their life story through
this lens, which is like how much
conviction do you need that you're in
the wrong place? Obama said on stage
when I spoke at this event um that he
spoke at many years ago that on his big
decisions in life, he gets to 51%
certainty and then makes the decision
with the peace of mind that he made the
decision with the best available
evidence. He talked about getting Osama
bin Laden in that compound in Pakistan.
He had never seen that he was there, but
he he risked two Apache helicopters of
lives and
>> like what percentage of certainty do you
need to make a big decision I think is a
determinant [clears throat] for the
long-term success you'll have in your
life. Some people need to get to like
95%. And you never get there in most
things.
>> Yeah. It's the difference in uh
behavioral economics between maximizing
and satisficing. It's like the two the
two terms like basically what's your
threshold for conviction? Yeah.
>> You know the paradox of choice by Barry
Schwarz. Do you know this? Okay. So
Barry Schwarz uses this wonderful
example of people buying jeans 50 years
ago going into the jeans store. You go
in and there is one type of jeans.
There's maybe different sizes maybe. And
you go in, you buy the pair of jeans,
you leave. Maybe they're not the perfect
jeans that you wanted, but you had no
other choice, right? So you got them. So
you're okay with your decision. Would
have been happier if there was others,
but there wasn't. So, your decision
regret is basically zero. Roll the clock
forward. It's 2025. You go into the
jeans store. Do you want skinny or
stretch? Do you want boot cut? Do you
want ripped? Do you want bleach? Do you
want gray, blue, black? If you walk out
of the jean store with a suboptimal pair
of jeans. This is no longer because of
restriction from the environment. This
is because of your inability to make the
right choice.
>> And this causes people to fear making
choices. They project the potential
regret they're fearful of in the future
down into the present and it causes
decision paralysis. So they don't do
anything. They think there's so many
different options here. And this is one
of the paradoxes where you think, well,
lots of choice allows you to maximize
what you want. You get the perfect pair
of jeans. So why is it that firstly
people tend to be less satisfied with
their decisions when they're given more
options and secondly why so many people
struggle to make decisions in the first
place? all because they're paralyzed by
the overanalysis they have of all of the
different optionality that's in front of
them.
>> Overanalysis paralysis.
Jeff Bezos's Amazon thing about type
one, type two doors is really useful
here because when kids come up to me at
the tours and stuff that I've done,
>> most of the time the question they're
asking me can be answered with with a
rebuttal, which is, "If you're wrong,
could you go back?"
>> Like, "If you're wrong about quitting
that job at City Bank, would City Bank
have you back?" or Santandere,
>> whoever, but you've been there for three
or four years. You're like a high
performer. You're killing it. You could
do it with your eyes closed. Of course,
they're going to have you back. In fact,
you probably get a pay rise if you go to
their competitor. So, in such a
scenario, go be the violinist in Peru
and do the cupcake thing.
>> Like the start the cupcake store because
if you're wrong,
>> you can always go back. And that
honestly, when I say that to kids, it's
almost like the most common rebuttal I
give them, which is like, if you're
wrong about this dream you have, would
you be welcomed back to your current
life?
>> Well, think about this. If you're
succeeding at a job that you hate,
imagine how great you'd be at one that
you loved.
>> If [clears throat] you're not fired up
about the thing that you're doing today
and you're still winning,
what could happen if you actually
enjoyed you were fired up when you woke
up in the morning? Imagine that.
>> Some people have never experienced to
know that it's possible.
>> It's tough, man. And lots of people have
got real world restrictions, which
[__] blows. But there's always
something that you can do that's little.
Another question people can ask
themselves when reflecting on last year.
What are some of the thoughts that you
repeated too many times this year? What
are the things that came up over and
over? That little voice in the back of
your head, that conversation that you
need to have?
>> What are the thoughts you repeated too
many times this year to the point that
it caused harm or distraction? It it
plagued you. There's this thing that's
there. [__] Like that thing that my
partner said to me 18 months ago over
dinner is still in the back of my mind
and I'm I'm ashamed of bringing it up to
them. I'm even more ashamed to bring it
up to them now because they're probably
not even going to remember it. But they
said they said this thing or they looked
at the waiter that way or or my boss
mentioned something in an email that
made me feel like they they really don't
value me and I really and it's just over
and over or [__] I need to I need to
sort my diet out. I need to sort my diet
out. I should sort my diet. I can't sort
my diet out. I'm going to sort my diet
out. I should sort I can't over and over
and over again. What are the thoughts
that plagued you this year? What are the
ones that kept on happening over and
over and over and over again? And
typically from that there is a
conversation that you need to have
or there is an emotion that you're
unprepared to feel. So another great
question, what are the emotions that
you're unprepared to feel? If fear comes
up, do you run away from it? You
distract yourself away from it. You
drink yourself away from it. You lift
yourself away from it. What are the
emotions you're unprepared to feel?
>> And you're safe to feel these emotions.
You can just sit there. It
>> It's interesting because as you said
that, I thought about how the framing of
85-year-old me was actually such a
wonderful way to understand this because
I know the question we asked earlier was
what would 85-year-old you like really
be annoyed that you did today. But the
inverse of that is like 85year-old
Steven is just going to wish I took care
of my body more.
>> It's like just it's not going to care
about the money. It's going to go, "You
[snorts] can't walk up a [__] hill,
my guy. your you your glutes have blown
out and you don't have flexibility and
you're hunched over and you you lose uh
respiratory
um you can't walk upstairs without being
out of breath.
>> Mhm.
>> And it's so interesting that if like
85year-old me is going to be so pissed
off that I didn't take care of my body
more.
>> It's even as someone that seems to take
care of their body quite a bit.
>> But still, yeah, you're making trades. I
I'd love, you know, what would I do to
make 85-year-old me miserable and what
would 85-year-old me want me to do more
of?
>> They're great great frames. Let me give
you a couple on uh problems and stress.
So, one of the issues that people come
up against is you've got the start of
the year, this wideeyed blue sky vision
for what's going to happen. And even
though you know that stuff's going to
come and sort of get in the way, it
always feels unfair when it does.
shouldn't be this way. We sort of rail
against the the road bumps that we have
along the way. So, uh, six lessons about
problems and stress. Number one,
problems are a feature of life, not a
bug. There will never come a time when
you have no problems. What did you you
think you were going to wake up one day
and there be no more problems? Like
completing a video game level and going
to a map where there's nothing there,
right? things
are always going to incur problems. Your
problems will change, but having
problems is going nowhere. Uh number
two, whatever negativity is consuming
your thoughts probably won't matter in 3
months time. Like in 3 months, you won't
remember the corrosive texture of your
own mind or the boring repetitive things
that you thought or or maybe even what
you worried about. I think what were you
worrying about 3 months ago right now?
Probably can't remember. don't remember,
>> but all of the time that you spent
worrying will have passed. So, you're
sacrificing your joy and your presence
in the moment for a problem that you
won't even be able to recall in the
future. So, immortality would kind of be
the only life where so much flippency
with the the time that we have would be
acceptable. Learning comes from the
edges. Number three, change is
uncomfortable and it rarely occurs
without a lot of stress. Learning comes
from the edges.
>> From the edges.
>> Pro approximate zone of development.
>> What does that mean?
>> You pushing yourself just beyond what
you're comfortable with. And sometimes
this can be emotional pain too. Leaving
the job happens when you get pushed out
of region beta on the bottom end or
growth happens when you overextend
yourself the right amount. Not so much
that you get injured, but so much that
you're challenged. That this is a new
zone for you to get into. I'm clawing
up. Wow. And it expands your potential,
your idea of what you're able to do. And
it's like it pushes you so that your
system becomes more resilient on the
other side.
Many of the periods of radical important
change that you have had in your life
have only occurred because of severe
challenges you faced. Like look back
almost all of the big periods of growth
in your life have germinated from your
lowest points.
In retrospect would you have avoided
them if you could? Probably not.
So yeah, this challenge is a gift. You
can uh lean into discomfort as if you
invited it through the door. It's like,
oh, there we are. Hello.
It's good to see you.
>> What thoughts did you repeat too many
times this year?
>> You're working too much.
>> Okay, so this is a recurring theme here.
>> Of course. Yeah. Yeah. Again, the big
questions, the big problems are the big
problems.
>> And you want to orientate your life
towards just having bigger gaps of
emptiness. Uh, but probably filling it
with other stuff. Family, same as you. I
can't wait to be a dad or dog. I should
have a dog. I should have a dog. How
many times have I thought the thought I
should have a dog? Get a golden
retriever.
>> I saw a tweet which has kind of haunted
me for 12 months. The tweet said, "Why
do all the big male podcasters not have
kids?"
>> All the big male podcasters not have
kids. They all talk about the population
crisis and this that and the other. And
then it was like Chris Williamson,
Huberman, Lex, Steven. None of them.
>> Jay got kids.
>> Jay Shetty.
>> Yeah. No. Okay. Yeah. But then also
Tucker Carlson's breeding a lot. Uh he's
he was number 10. Rogan's got like three
daughters, I think. Three or four
daughters. So
>> Rogan's the only one that But think
about it as well. There's a generational
difference here. Like Tucker and Rogan
are of the same generation. And this
younger generation of like
>> It's very flattering for Andrew Huberman
in his 50s, but
>> Oh, yeah. [__] [laughter] Yeah. But why
why is that? Why don't we have kids?
I I mean it's a it's a great question.
Um for me, I spent a lot of time in my
20ies really trying to work out who I
was. I had my head up my own ass. Like
I'm happy to say that I had a uh slow
development psychologically in terms of
becoming the person I wanted to in terms
of realizing how important different
things were to me. Like how long have
you known
felt it I should have kids?
I've always wanted kids, but I've not
put steps in place to make that happen.
Um, up until the last two years. And you
know what's crazy? I'm completely
unprepared. I am my life as it is now is
not ready for kids.
>> I fly too much. I'm too busy. I have too
many prior other priorities
>> in order to pick something up.
>> Yeah. But something down.
>> But I have this sort of meta view which
is the big step up in meaning in my life
will probably come from that. So even
though there's no emotion in my body
that's telling me that this is a good
idea,
>> close my eyes and do it and I will
adjust.
>> I will adjust to the responsibility as I
always have. There was no room in my
life for a podcast when I started this
podcast,
>> right?
>> But I adjusted. And so it goes against
every inclination that I have to have
children right now as a as a as a man
that has freedom, who is 33 years old,
who can go wherever he wants, whenever
he wants, and doesn't really have to
answer to any major responsibilities
outside of my
>> Do you like that? Do you like the fact
that you don't have dependence in that
way?
>> If you ask this brain,
>> yes, I like freedom. I like the fact
that I after this conversation I can
work on my business, go to the gym, go
wherever I want, fly somewhere, go to
Hawaii. I like the freedom. However,
there's this like meta brain
>> that is my regret brain and it lives 50
years from now and it's been inspired by
all the conversations I've had on the
podcast and it says to me that actually
the most meaningful thing you can do is
increase the amount of dependence and
responsibility that you have.
>> This is an unteachable lesson, dude.
that uh you should probably have kids
now, right? That could be a could be a
lesson perhaps.
>> Yeah.
>> That you will never feel ready. That
could be an unteable lesson.
>> We have this population decline
situation going on.
>> Mhm. [snorts]
>> And
is it it's is it not a function of or a
consequence of the fact that we have
more freedom, more control, we're like
more nihilistic. We we
>> it's more like me me. M
>> now there's like a subtle narcissism
which is bred in society and look I I
ain't got kids but just so you know lads
[laughter]
that are watching I'm doing everything
in my power some things that I can't
actually tell you about but I'm doing
everything in my power to to have kids
as soon as possible.
>> Okay.
>> So I I imagine that I'll be a father
>> that just sounds like shagging all the
time.
>> Well, [laughter] yeah.
>> Okay.
>> But I think I'll be a dad within the
next 12 months.
>> Amazing.
>> And I I and I I have to say this again
because it's so important. Like there's
no part of me in this moment of time
that's like, "Oh, I really really want
to be a dad." I can see the cost, but
the benefit is unknown. I have to take
other people's words for it.
>> It's crazy, dude. It's it's a a painful
realization. And um I've had some of the
best demographers in the world on uh
Lyman Stone uh from the Institute for
Family Studies, Steven J. Shaw who did
the birth gap documentary. Uh these
people know what's going on and it's a
it's a function of a lot of things. It's
a a function of people having other
stuff to do. There are so many other
things to do than have kids. Uh reliable
contraception. That means that you can
choose to put it off. You can continue
to push it off for as long as you want.
Specifically, uh women's socioeconomic
emancipation into the workforce and in
higher education. That means that at 18,
the first thing you do isn't get
married. Oh, I'm going to go to
university. Well, I've just put three or
four years into university. I'm going to
now go and get a job and now I've
committed to the job. I'm going to maybe
climb the corporate ladder. That's
pushed the vitality curve back. It's
made it later rather than being earlier.
And another problem is because there is
such a multiplicity of different life
directions that people can go down. The
likelihood of you being ready at 22 and
you meeting someone else who's also
ready at 22 is actually quite low. So if
you think that you could have a graph
like this uh vitality curve it's called
by Steven Shaw and previously it would
have been very short and and sharp and
spiky and that would be like when people
want to have kids it's like you know
from 18 to 24 let's say if you meet
anybody within that age range it's
likely that they're at the same life
situation as you as you flatten that
curve make it longer and you also push
it a little bit later you're now 35 to
meet somebody that's also 35 and ready
to have kids but you meet some that not
because there's too much area under the
curve that's flat as opposed to
everybody kind of dancing to the same
tune. They're all dancing to different
tunes.
>> Uh so that contributes to it. I
certainly think that there is a anti-f
family message that comes about that
there's a girl with the list on Tik Tok
which I think is this girl who wrote 350
reasons to not have kids. It's like
eight pages, nine pages long and it went
super viral and it's everything from
literally a parasite growing inside of
your body to can't wear cute heels with
the girls, will have to miss brunch, all
of the different issues that can occur
during childirth and then I think there
was a a list of things for kids and it
was like maybe a page a half a page long
that she'd written and um we she is open
to seeing the world as she wishes. I
think by the sounds of things, it is a
really good idea that she's not a
mother. And I'm glad that she's choosing
to not have kids. But that tone, that
sentiment is like prevalent because
people see this is what I have to
sacrifice now.
Pain, discomfort, lack of freedom
for something that I have no idea about
whether or not it's going to make me
satisfied in future. And yeah, maybe
people say it's the most important thing
or whatever, but it's easy to excuse
away when there are so many other things
I can do with my life. I can travel
around Bali and I can watch Netflix and
I could build a business and I could
start a substack or I could build a
YouTube channel and do a podcast. All of
these things you could do. Pushing off,
pushing off, pushing off. It's no
surprise. And the final point is I think
um having kids is mimemetic. So
>> what does that mean?
>> Uh you model the behavior of the people
that are around you and the people that
you see. So good example of this Uh,
South Korea's got one of the worst birth
rates in the world. It's uh for every
hundred South Koreans, there will be
four great grandchildren. A 96%
reduction over the next century. It's
insane. There are entire classrooms,
whole schools in South Korea that are
unoccupied now. And um there are many
many reasons. the 4Bs movement, uh the
the um increasing of women's acceptance
into education, and then when they got
into the workforce, they were still
being prejudiced against, which meant
that they swore off a lot of the things
that they were promised. Like lots and
lots and lots of different reasons, but
one of the big ones culturally, which is
really fascinating, is K-pop. K-pop was
this export that Korea was going to put
to the world. We have this ability to
construct like the perfect boy band or
girl band. we're going to export it to
the world and this is going to be a
representation for us. One of the things
that K-pop stars have to say is that
they will be celibate while they're in
the band. So, not only does this mean
that they can't be in a relationship, so
the most popular cultural influences in
South Korea aren't showing a pro-
relationship narrative.
>> They also [clears throat] obviously
can't be mothers or fathers because they
can't be in a relationship. the converse
of this cultural intervention in the
country of Georgia, very religious and
there's this superstar pastor guy, very
religious country, this this this pastor
that's kind of like a really rock star
sort of dude.
He said, "I will personally baptize the
third child of any family in the
country." So now these parents are
speedrunning having kids so that their
child can be baptized by the equivalent
like you know the goat. He's like the
the the the like [__] Avichi of uh of
of of pastas.
K-pop did the exact opposite. They had a
cultural intervention which showed a
nonp pro- family influence whereas
Georgia had this one that was a pro-
family influence. So, a cultural
intervention that South Korea could
easily implement would be to say the
only way that you can become a K-pop
star is to already have had a kid. Like,
we're only going to create boy bands and
girl bands out of people who have
already had families.
>> This kind of brings the conversation to
me and you because there's a lot of men
that listen to your show. There's a lot
of men that listen to my show. And I do
think in many respects we're modeling to
some respects to some people what it is
to be a good man.
by what we choose to do. You know, you
have a lot of influence. I've watched
the videos of people coming to you after
after your tours and they say to you
that you're their friend. They're like
they thank you for the fact that you
have been their their big brother or
their friend to look up to. And so I I
think about this a lot which is like
what am I modeling
>> as a as a podcaster? We're both in the
top 10 list of the global podcasts uh
according to Spotify. So do you think
about what you you model and do you
think about what a good man is? Do you
think about what you want your audience
to think of a man's responsibility is?
>> Yeah, very much so. That being said,
I've never claimed to be some shining
example of what people should do.
>> Uh I certainly know that I try my best
to
be the sort of guy that I would want to
be friends with. I I quite like me. I
quite like me. And I've worked really
hard. I didn't like me. And I worked
really, really hard to form myself into
a shape, a construction.
I feel big emotions, for instance. And
for a long time I was very ashamed of
them and I wouldn't get below the neck
and I would use intellect to like
protect myself from feeling my feelings.
And on stage anybody that's come to see
my live show I get tearary every night.
I get tearary telling the same story.
Okay. Well, I think that's like a a good
thing. I think it's a good thing for
guys who feel their emotions to show
that they feel their emotions. Right.
Suppression isn't the same thing as
strength.
and I've stopped suppressing. Wonderful.
I think that there is uh wonderful
upside in trying to conquer and trying
to achieve mastery, trying to really
drive yourself to go and do stuff. But
I'm not like [__] your feelings, just
hustle and grind until your eyes bleed
either. So, I'm trying to show balance.
I think mindfulness is really important.
I think that a physical practice is
really important. All of this stuff kind
of appears in the exterior. Remember
what I said before? What's the
conversation we're prepared to have?
What's the one thing that you should be
doing? It's usually the big thing. The
big thing is probably going to be
something to do with have a [__]
family, dude. Like, it's time for you to
have a family, but it's a uh
>> Is that scary for you? Be honest.
>> To have a family? No.
>> But the the sacrifice and commitment
>> It used to be.
>> Used to be. Yeah. Of course.
>> When did that change?
>> Two years ago.
>> Really?
>> Two or three years ago? Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And again, we are products of our
environment. like all of the the
cornucopia of different things that we
can do. Look at this paniply of options
that I could spend my life doing. And
you sort of get shiny object syndrome
and you chase after things and isn't it
going to be exciting and then you get to
where you thought you wanted to be and
you go
that might not be the answer.
That's why
having a bit of time to reflect, having
a little bit of time for quiet, fleeting
thoughts to come up. Like a busy
calendar is a hedge against existential
loneliness. Right? If you are always
needed by somebody, you don't have to
sit with your quiet thoughts. You don't
have to think, "Oh, [__] that deep
question that's been in the back of my
mind. I'm it's easy to push off if
people want me or I move from
caffeinefueled meeting to evening
dinner. I actually have to listen to
that." But if you sit with your thoughts
for a little bit, and this is why a lot
of people don't like sitting with their
thoughts, this stuff comes up. And
that's why the question, "What emotions
are you unprepared to feel?" is so good.
>> What changed two years ago that made you
change your perspective?
>> I don't know. I grew up. I just I guess
that's what growing up is called. Like
it wasn't some moment where the skies
opened and and things changed. I noticed
I used to think I used to think that
kids were super annoying. My business
partner uh had his first son when he was
25. So I would have been 252, 25, 26
maybe. And I remember thinking, [__]
like he just can't come out with me
anymore. Like he's busy. He's got all
this stuff to do. And then each kid that
he had, it was about two years apart,
each one. I noticed my relationship to
the child was different. I was like,
"Oh, okay. Well, you know, they're kind
of kind of cute or whatever." And then
another one came along and I'm like,
"Okay, like that's really." So, I saw
this sort of um sedimentary rock, this
like archaeological dig of myself
change, and now I'm godfather to uh my
best friend's daughter, beautiful
daughter who's like four months old, 5
months old. And I love going around and
seeing her. And yeah, I I don't know.
It's just growing up, dude. Growing up's
weird because something changes and you
kind of didn't choose it. Do you know
what I mean? Like, did you choose?
>> No. [__] me. No, it's weird, man. It's
weird.
>> This belief climbs inside of you and
sort of wears you a little bit.
>> Yeah. And a lot of the time we're scared
of that and I understand why. But like
resisting the fact that that's there
like
I don't know it's kind of a denial of
this beautiful thing that's just been
given to you. There you go. There's like
something new and exciting that you can
move into. And I think a lot of friction
is in the resistance, right? Suffering
is in the resistance of the thing.
>> I've just finished writing my third
book. I haven't firmed up the title yet,
but I have started mocking up some
different designs. And I've been doing
this with Adobe Express, which is one of
our sponsors. What I love about Adobe
Express is that it makes it so easy for
me to obsess over the tiniest details.
The typography, the font, the color, the
text placement, the stuff that might
sound petty to most people, but actually
compounds to create something that
stands out, something that's one better
than the rest. And designing my cover
art has reminded me of how many creative
things I've learned over the year. But
it's also reminded me that there are so
many creative minds around me that are
also sitting on their own secrets. So
I've created the one better guide in
Adobe Express to bring those tips to
you. And in it, you'll find principles
from the very, very best in their
industry turned into quick and easy
practices for you to apply so you can
train yourself to create exactly like
the best performing teams in the world
do. Just head over to adobe.wet
to download Adobe Express now. And make
sure you visit the learn tab to discover
how you can become one better than the
rest. You know, every once in a while
you come across a product that has such
a huge impact on your life that you'd
probably describe as a gamecher. And I
would say for about 35 to 40% of my
team, they would currently describe this
product that I have in front of me
called Ketone IQ, which you can get at
ketone.com
as a game changer. But the reason I
became a coowner of this company and the
reason why they they now are a sponsor
of this podcast is because one day when
I came to work there was a box of this
stuff sat on my desk. I had no idea what
it was. Lily in my team says that this
company have been in touch. So I went
upstairs tried it and quite frankly the
rest is history in terms of my focus, my
energy levels, how I feel, how I work,
how productive I am. Game changer. So if
you want to give it a try, visit
ketone.com/stephven
for 30% off. You'll also get a free gift
with your second shipment and now you
can find Keton IQ at Target stores
across the United States where your
first shot is completely free of charge.
You mentioned a word earlier on. You
talked about the lonely chapter.
>> Uhhuh.
>> You [snorts] you said the word briefly.
I guess this lonely chapter idea is a
consequence of what will happen when you
go in pursuit of a big goal. You want to
start the business. You want to quit the
job. Whatever. Explain to me what the
lonely chapter is. The lonely chapter
describes a time in your life where
you're so developed that you can't
really resonate with your old set of
friends, but you're not yet sufficiently
developed that you've built a new set of
friends.
>> Give me an example.
>> You have decided to stop drinking. Your
New Year's resolution is 6 months. I'm
going to stop drinking. You can go out
with your friends that want to go to the
pub on an evening time, but you feel a
little bit ostracized. They're having
digs at you and jibes at you. Oh, come
on, mate. Only one beer. Who do you
think you are?
Um, so your change is creating some
friction between you and them. Your
friends like to play Xbox on an evening
time and that's how they hang out, but
you want to start going to the gym, but
your friends don't go to the gym and
then when you do hang out with them,
you're talking about the gym because
that's your new thing and they're still
talking about Xbox. So there is a a
friction that happens as you try to grow
because if your friends don't grow at
the same pace as you, you don't speak
the same language. A friend referred to
it as changing your dialect so much so
that over time you and your friends
don't even speak the same language
anymore.
>> And it's very uncomfortable because it's
tempting to go back to the old life that
you're used to. The old patterns, the
old routines, the old friend groups, the
old everything. And you have to stop
doing the things that you know bring you
validation in the moment to start doing
the things that you have no idea about
whether it'll actually work. Like you're
going to tell me that I'm not going to
go out with my friends this weekend cuz
I'm going to keep my meditation streak
going. Who even knows if meditation
works, right? It's so much easier to
just stay in the routine that you were
previously doing the same sort of
things. for you to pull away from that,
you're going to have to do stuff usually
that makes you more different, more easy
to be mocked, and more alone.
And the initial sad reality is that on
your journey of personal growth, at some
point you may need to leave a group of
friends behind who aren't growing at the
same pace as you.
But the really sad reality is that if
you do it a lot, you may have to do this
multiple times throughout your life. And
it's not a value judgment about who's
better or who's worse. It's just a stark
reality of what happens when you start
to make changes in your life. And I for
instance, I met a million people on the
front door of nightclubs. Million people
in person had a handful of friends. I
worked with half of them. Million
people, handful of friends in internet
marketing speak. My friendship
conversion funnel ratio was not very
good. Million people, handful of
friends. And the only way that I could
work out who I was was to kind of follow
my own instincts and do some of the
personal development stuff. Like a
thousand days sober, 500 days without
caffeine, which is [__] miserable.
Nine gratitude meditation journals with
no idea if any of it was going to work.
And this is the really important thing,
and it's a bit that all origin stories
miss. And I I wish that they paid more
attention to it.
Seems to me that on every hero's
journey, as soon as they make the
commitment to go from where they are to
where they want to be, their self-belief
never waver. Like, sure, there's ups and
downs in the journey and the progress,
but their conviction doesn't slip. It's
like at that moment, the clouds parted
and I was sure I was going to become a
UFC fighter. I was going to become a
businessman. I was going to get off
drugs, change my mindset, whatever. In
my experience, that's not the way it is
at all. Like your entire journey of
personal growth is just steeped in doubt
and self-pity and uncertainty and it
tarnishes the whole experience. It's not
sexy. It's not cool. You're like, "This
is supposed to be my rocky cut scene.
It's three and a half minutes in the
movies, but it's been four years for me.
What's going on?" There's not even the
promise that there's any glory on the
other side of it. And this
is exactly why it's so much easier to
just go back to your old patterns. Why
it's easier to just go back to doing the
old things that you used to do. People
make small changes. They do little
things. Lose 5 pounds or they change
companies. But how many people do you
know that have really changed their
mindset? Lost 50 or 100 pounds or change
careers or moved from the city that they
grew up in? It's rarer. And I think the
reason that I love this lonely chapter
idea is that it it names something that
a lot of people feel is a bug, not a
feature of personal growth, which is
this discordance with their old patterns
and their old friend groups and the fact
that they don't know whether the
uncomfortability is supposed to be
there. Is this discomfort right? Is my
self-doubt? Surely I should just believe
and see it, believe it, achieve it. Am I
not supposed to just be, you know,
single-mindedly going toward my goal?
This doubt is supposed to be there. I I
can promise you that every single person
who has gone from a place where they
didn't want to be to one where they did
has had to go through this lonely
chapter and deal with all of this. And
uh I think it resonates with people
because the sort of people who listen to
Modern Wisdom and your show are the sort
of people that this is about. It's the
kind of people who live in the UK and
want to do something themselves
who want to build a business, do
something that there isn't a
particularly good role model for. That's
presumably because they want to do
something. They want to become better.
They feel like they're built for more.
Uh, and this is what I meant when I said
before that you can just do things. Just
do it anyway. Do it tired,
do it sad, do it lonely, do it without a
role model because if you're waiting for
somebody to come along and give you that
helping hand, sometimes you're going to
be waiting too long.
>> It reminds me so much of um Jeff Bezos's
shareholder letter where he talks about
resisting the equilibrium. in his final
2020 sharehold shareholder letter said,
"Differentiation is survival and the
universe wants you to be typical." And
the way that this dubtails into what
you've said is your environment is very
very much holding you in place. And
actually in every facet of life, every
organism is currently expending a huge
amount of energy just to resist the pull
to be typical
>> regression to the mean.
>> Exactly. So if you were to like leave
your friendship group now, the the
amount of energy it's going to take to
stay untypical is tremendous. And he
says, "This is my last annual
shareholder letter as the CEO of Amazon,
>> and I have one last thing of utmost
importance I feel compelled to teach. I
hope all Amazonians take it to heart.
Here is a passage from Richard Dawkins
book, The Blind Watchmaker. It's about a
basic fact of biology. Saving off death
is a thing that you have to work at.
Left to itself and that is what it is
when it dies. The body tends to revert
to a state of equilibrium with its
environment. If you measure some
quantity such as the temperature, the
acidity, the water content or the
electrical potential of a living body,
you will typically find that it is
markedly different from the
corresponding measure in its
surroundings. Our bodies, for instance,
are usually hotter than our
surroundings. And in cold climates, they
have to work hard to maintain that
differential. When we die, the work
stops. The temp temperature differential
starts to disappear and we end up the
same temperature as our surroundings.
Not all animals have to work so hard to
avoid coming into equilibrium with their
surrounding temperature. But all animals
do some comparable work. For instance,
in a dry country, animals and plants
work to maintain the fluid content in
their cells. They work against a natural
tendency for water to flow from them
into the dry outside world. If they
fail, they die. More generally, if
living things didn't work actively to
prevent it, they would eventually merge
into their surroundings and cease to
exist as autonomous beings. This is what
happens when they die. And what he's
talking about here is that to be
different in any context or environment,
work is being done. Like to stay
atypical, and I think about this as we
come into the new year, which is if
you're planning to be different, quit
the job, go and be the violinist in
Peru, start the cupcake business. It's
going to cost you so much energy to
resist the equilibrium that you better
going back to what you said about
subtracting things. You better save
energy somewhere else
>> because
you know I had a neuroscientist on the
podcast that was the neuroscientist that
discovered we have a biological budget
of energy and literally like a bank
account. And what tends to happen, I
think, and why the the New Year stats
are so horrific in terms of the amount
of people that stick to their goals is
we go in search of
a new state, a new life that's going to
cost us even more energy to resist the
our current environment without
budgeting for it by saving elsewhere.
And I think about this through the lens
of as a business owner because as a
company the dire of a co will become
like the mean the minute we stop the
fight. [snorts]
>> The minute we stop experimenting the
minute we stop pushing the boundaries.
The minute you stop doing the big
digital screens the minute you give up
the fight you will become every other
show. That's what I meant when I said
problems are a feature of life not a
bug. Like there will be no day when you
don't have any problems. And uh railing
against it. Why is the flight delayed?
Because flights get delayed. Because
flights get delayed. That's why. And did
you think that there was going to be a
day when no flights were delayed? That
you're going to reach some escape
velocity where this was no longer an
issue? I love this analogy using escape
velocity. Imagine that we've got a uh
rocket ship here. So when this is taking
off on the launch pad is when it needs
the most energy. The inertia is the
highest, the resistance is the most. So
that's when you need to use whatever
fuel you've got. Use the chip on your
shoulder from the kids that bullied you
in school. Use your desperate desire to
be seen by that girl out there. Use your
need for validation from your parents,
whatever it is. And then what happens is
the old school style rockets, not the
new Falcon 9 ones. What happens when
this takes off?
This fuel source switches off and then
the booster rockets come on. That's as
you get to a different level of altitude
and now you're using a different sort of
fuel source and then this falls away,
the bottom falls off and it keeps on
going and then it gets into escape
velocity. Use what you have at the
start. And at the start, most people
have way more discontent than they do
love.
>> There's a I mean, even this ties right
back to New Year's resolutions because
if I am going to make a change and reach
escape velocity, then I'm going to need
to focus all my energy and therefore
save leakage, like save wasted energy in
this moment of time. And I've heard you
talk about this when you do your annual
review that again it goes back to what
we're saying like you do need to cut
some [__] and you can't have it all at
the same time if you are going to change
your life.
This is one of the problems of
overcooking your goals for the next 12
months. I think you can probably do two
big things in 2026. Two big things. You
can probably lose 20 pounds and get a
boyfriend that you really, really love.
You can't do that and move cities and
start a new business and and learn to
play the piano. No. And that again is
why don't go into a buffet and assume
that however much food you put on the
plate, your stomach will just expand to
fit it in. Because what you're going to
guarantee is that you fail next year.
You can almost guarantee that you fail
at doing this thing. Is it great to set
your sights high? Yeah, that's real
cool. And maybe you've got lots of
things that you want to do, but just
what would have to happen by the end of
next year for you to look back on it and
consider it a success. And what if you
created a rankordered list and okay, I
need to kill one of these and you left
yourself with one or two. What's left?
You could only do one thing next year.
Cross that off. Cross that off. Cross
that. What am I left with?
I really want to lose the weight. There
we go. Now we can break that down into
individual steps. I need to get a gym
membership. I need to get some cool gym
wear that makes me feel good as I go to
the gym.
I've heard you talk, you know, you
mentioned that get getting a boyfriend
next year. One of the resolutions a lot
of people will have, even if it's not
directly, is to find a partner.
>> And I I heard you referencing
psychological stability as the thing we
should be looking for in a partner.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> What do you mean by psychological
stability?
>> After some sort of emotional
perturbment, after something happens,
how long does it take for them to get
back to baseline?
>> Oh, okay. So, I'm looking for someone
who is just what? emotionally stable or
they they returned
>> the return to their emotional
equilibrium. Right? So, let's say that
we're going on holiday and uh the flight
is cancelled and it's a big deal because
their family is going out there. Is that
the sort of thing that happens and then
there is a reversion to baseline within
a few hours or is that the sort of thing
that blows up the entire trip of the
holiday with their family? M
>> something occurs that causes emotions to
be uh impacted. How long does it take to
get back to baseline? That's emotional
stability and it's very predictive of
relationship outcomes. Some other stuff
um conscientiousness.
Person's thoughtful. They think a lot
about you specifically and they care.
Agreeableness. Someone who's moderately
agreeable. You want somebody who when
you propose plans is a a yes and person
like huh yeah
and finally you want someone who's
moderately open in openness personality
trait. So there's three
conscientiousness agreeableness openness
to experience. You want someone who's
moderately open so that they're prepared
to go and do new things. As soon as you
get into high openness that's when
wandering eyes come in. This isn't to
say that personality traits are destiny,
rah,
but based on titro's work, this is
pretty reliable. I also like the
psychological stability thing. I think
that's really, really lovely. You want
somebody who feels like home. You want a
relationship that feels like a safe
harbor that you can wall yourself off
against all of the ills of the world.
Your business can fall apart. Your
health can decay. Your friends can
abandon you.
But you know that at home there's
someone who loves you for who you are,
not for what you do, and they've always
got your back. And I think
aiming for a relationship that feels
like a safe harbor is a really good
idea.
>> It's rough at the moment, isn't it? For
I just I just I'm so glad that I'm not
single because when I look out at the
dating landscape of like dating apps and
all this stuff, I'm so glad that I I'm
not out there in in that war zone. Mhm.
>> And when you, you know, there's a lot of
single people that follow you, men and
women. When you think about if you were
30-year-old Chris, and you're a single
guy, you're not doing the podcast,
people don't know who you are.
>> If you were trying to solve the love
problem in your life, where would you
aim at first?
>> Like the love problem, that's cool. Um,
the first thing you need to do is say,
am I the sort of person who the sort of
person I want to date wants to date?
[laughter]
>> Yeah. If not, it's obvious where you
need to work. Work on yourself.
>> That's such an important question that
requires such honesty.
>> Yeah. And this again is why some time
away from the urgent in the importance,
some time to reflect, some time to
listen to your fleeting thoughts. You
know, you know that your wardrobe sucks.
You know that your wardrobe sucks and
you hate fashion and you've excused it.
It's like, I don't need to do that or
I'm not interested or whatever.
Hey, dude. I'm sorry.
Chicks care about how you look. Shock
horror. They care about what you wear.
probably need to go and update the
wardrobe. You got a female friend. You
watch a few YouTube videos online. Maybe
that's where you need to start. I'm a
bit overweight. I'm a bit skinny fat.
The gym is one of the most reliable ways
to increase your attractiveness. One of
the most reliable ways as a man to
increase your attractiveness. You need
to be a real super Chad to not need to
have any physical practice at all and
still be able to get the sort of woman
that you want. So, okay, maybe you're
going to start to go to the gym, but
let's assume that you have reached the
level that you need to be at in order to
be attractive to the sort of person that
you are. So, that's the first one,
right? Because if you're not, you're
permanently uh condemning yourself to
always pine after partners that aren't
going to want you back. Next step, where
do partners like the sort of person that
you want to date hang out? Where do they
go? Like if you love dance music, it's
probably a bad idea to go to a breath
work class. Like why not just go to
parties that have got dance DJs on? Or
if you're really into lectures and
philosophy, go to an Alex Okconor live
event or something and hang around
outside or like talk to the girl that's
next to you. If you really love sport,
like obviously go to the gym, pick up
pickle ball, like start doing that.
Where are the sorts of places inhabited
by the sort of person that you want to
be like? There's bonus points if you can
go and do a thing that you have a little
bit of a competitive advantage at,
especially as a guy. If you used to play
tennis in high school and you've got a
bit of hand eye coordination, you can
probably be one of the best pickle ball
players at a recreational court pretty
quickly and you're going to be that new
guy who's like a like you seem like I
want to play with him like he always
wins or whatever it might be. Like not
being manipulative, you're just playing
to your strengths.
>> What decision did you make in your life
that made you more attractive than any
other decision? going to [clears throat]
the gym. Going to the gym. Uh I started
training when I was 18 at the Center for
Sporting Excellence at Newcastle
University. I had no idea what I was
doing and was taking blueberry extract
and unflavored hydraized whey in a
desperate attempt to see if I could gain
some size and I just didn't stop. And um
I like it. It makes me healthier. It
makes me feel powerful. It it it added
to my frame. I had real hard gain. It
took [__] ages to put weight. I
remember when I was 20 and I broke 70
kilos for the first time and I was like,
I'm [__] huge. Um, and I just didn't
stop. And I think not only is it
something that's great for me, it's
something that really very reliably
makes you more attractive to women.
>> What about for women? [snorts]
>> What do you think in your POV would
make?
>> Look, I would be tempted to go for the
gym thing too. And the reason that I
like it is that it is it's
uh you benefit on multiple levels. Like
even what you don't want to do is do
something that makes your life feel like
a performance for your future partner.
>> You want something that even if that
doesn't come along, you're still glad
you did it. And how many people say, "I
went to the gym in an attempt to get
better legs because the guy that I want
to attract is kind of like into girls
that have got good legs and I want to
wear like nice dresses and look cute in
them and all the rest of it." But I
really hated the way that I my boyfriend
didn't come along and what I was I broke
myself trying to do I lost myself trying
to do that. No, you made yourself. You
won independently of whether or not that
person came along. And how wonderful is
that for you? So I I I mean this is just
me shamelessly shilling for everybody to
go to the gym and get jagged. Uh
[laughter]
but I think that would be good. One
other thing I think that is maybe a
slightly unusual strategy that women can
cultivate is receptiveness.
So I think especially in a postmeto
world, a lot of guys are very scared of
approaching. Guys have always been
scared of approaching women. But in a
postmeto world, they've been taught that
anything short of a hell yeah is a no
get away from me so that you don't make
the girl feel uncomfortable.
guys already were quite nervous going up
and talking to you. So, you have to
treat a man and his interest kind of
like slightly inexperienced golden
retriever. It needs to be very loud,
very obvious signals of interest from
you. So, in the middle ages or
aristocratic middle ages, ladies would
drop a handkerchief in front of a
gentleman. Oh, mom. Mom. Oh. In 2025 in
New York, there are women uh stealing
finance bros salads, finding their names
from the salad on Instagram, and then
messaging them and saying, "Sorry, I
accidentally took your salad." Like,
that's the 2025 equivalent of dropping
the handkerchief. But receptiveness, I
think, is important. Like, hey ladies,
if you like that guy and he's not
approaching you, maybe assume that he
doesn't know that you like him and apply
a little bit more receptiveness. And
another the other side of this is if a
guy does come up to you and you're not
into him, don't mock him or make it like
uncomfortable to his face because you
are ruining the next girl's chances who
really does want him by making him feel
not enough for doing it. It's taken
a superhuman amount of strength to come
up and say, "Hello, I just wanted to say
I thought you look really lovely today.
What's your name?" That was the most
terrifying thing that that guy has done
that day. And if you don't, if you're
not receptive, even if you don't want
it, it kind of creates this culture of
men feeling broken and and like they
shouldn't do that more.
>> So,
>> yeah, there's some
>> What is um what is the most important
things we haven't talked about that we
should have talked about, Chris, as it
relates to this time of year?
>> The strivvers who want to make make
change, become someone else.
>> Stop taking life so seriously.
Like no one is getting out of this game
alive. Literally
in three generations, no one will even
remember your name.
And if that doesn't give you liberation
to just drop your [__] problems for a
moment and find some joy, I don't know
what will. Like life is inherently
ridiculous and guaranteed to end sooner
or later.
So, you might as well enjoy the ride.
>> Do you know your great granddad's name?
>> Nope. Do
>> you?
>> No. [laughter]
>> People don't like that idea. And I I I
get it. Maybe you will be remembered for
generations to come.
But just assume that you don't. This is
this deferred happiness syndrome thing,
dude. Like, don't wait. Life really is
happening right now.
There there is this belief that once
life's duties are out of the way, then
you can finally start doing the thing
you want to and fully living your life.
It's uh called the provisional life.
This sort of strange feeling that you're
not yet in your real life. For now,
you're doing this thing or that, but
there's always the fantasy that at some
point in future
the real thing will come about.
There is a kind of urgency that I think
we could all do with and uh that's not
to put pressure on people so that they
feel um like a failure if they fall
short.
It's not to deny the fact that people
have got real legitimate resource and
time constraints that mean that they
can't do a thing.
But don't wait.
This life really is happening right now.
And
I can't think of many times when you're
going to regret
trying
to make something happen. Now, I guess
one other thing, the sort of people that
have made it this deep into the episode
are the ones that this is about.
I think type A people have a type B
problem. So, insecure overachievers. Is
that type A?
>> Yep. Need to learn how to chill out and
relax. And lazy people need to learn how
to be motivated and work harder. But
given that someone is two hours into a
podcast between me and you, I'm going to
guess that they're probably type A. Some
version of a walking anxiety disorder
harnessed for productivity, as Andrew
Wilkinson says. And here's the thing
that you may have already realized,
which is type A people with type B
problems often get very little sympathy
because a miserable but outwardly
successful person always appears to be
in a much more preferential position
than a content being lazy but on the
verge of bankruptcy. One like one feels
like uh a a limitation and the other
feels like a choice. One is a systemic
imposition and the other is like a
bourgeoa luxury, right? I need someone
to teach me how to work harder and be
disciplined feels upward aiming, noble,
charitable. I need someone to teach me
how to switch off and relax feels
dopamineergic, transactional, like
opulent.
Every underdog movie ever has a scene of
some person down on their luck learning
how to work harder and pull themselves
up by their bootstraps.
None include a scene of a guy learning
how to log out of Slack at 6 PM or
finally enjoy a beach holiday.
[clears throat]
>> And like I said before, maybe more
people do need David Gogggin screaming
in their face to go harder than need
Echart Tole whispering in their ear that
they're enough already.
But for a perhaps minority of people,
they actually need to hear the opposite
message. We need a a parasympathetic
Gogggins who's going to carry the TV
remote and the Cheetos. # rest harder
than me. We need to teach people to give
themselves a [__] break. And this is
a an odd thing to hold in both our hands
at the same time. You do not want to
have a victim mindset. You want to have
agency on the world. You want to enact
stuff that's going on. You want to make
it and you're going to have to try
really hard.
And also,
you need to give yourself a break. You
have to know that if you nailed your
day, you don't just make it back to
zero. You got to plus 10.
There's no arbitrary minimum level of
productivity you have to achieve every
day in order to be worthwhile.
Are you religious? And I asked this
because you talked about the idea of
death and pursuit and you don't know how
long you've got left. M
>> and I think it probably has to be framed
in the context of what you think happens
thereafter.
>> Uh no, I wouldn't call myself religious.
Are you?
>> The way that I look at it is if you look
at our evolutionary history, we we're
meant to be part of something. But if
you look at the narrative of the last 20
years, that's given rise because of
social media. It's all about be your own
boss, remote work. I mean, we talked
about the whole kids thing, people
having less kids. So we're actually
swinging away from dependency to
independence and freedom. And it appears
to me that freedom and total
independence
>> will make you sick.
>> So naturally our masov needs going this
doesn't feel right. I need to I need
some I need to belong somewhere.
>> Think about this Maslo's hierarchy of
needs uh an existential crisis. You
asking yourself the question or anybody
that goes through this review process
chriswex.com/review.
Anyone that goes through that and
thinks, "I don't know what to do with my
life." Think about how few people
throughout human history have ever had
to ask themselves that question.
>> Dayto-day, desperately just trying to
cling on to existence, unsure whether or
not the cold snap tomorrow is going to
come into the cave and kill them all.
An existential crisis is a luxurious
position to be in. And it feels
horrendous. How do you hold those two
things in your mind at one time? Yeah.
>> Like you're telling me I'm blessed
because I'm asking myself questions that
make me doubt the meaning of my life.
>> Yeah. And uh maybe that's where religion
is is stepping in now to try and give
people some guidance on that sort of
stuff. I saw a tweet that said um my
parents had the problem of survival and
I have the problem of
self-actualization.
And I think um sometimes [laughter]
sometimes
some I got to be careful what I say
here, but I'm say you know they are both
they both come with their own challenges
I should say.
>> Absolutely. I mean and there's this idea
I had the other day of the the shame of
small fears which is what this is about.
So imagine explaining small fears to a
caveman. say, "Uh, Grook, I worry about
sending this message." And Grrook would
respond,
"Will the enemy try and see the
message?" "No." "Will a saber-tooth
tiger smell the message?" "No." "Will it
be etched on the wall for the rest of
time?" "No, it's a little small
rectangle."
"Why are you worried?"
uh in case somebody doesn't like me or
like what I say or I hurt their
feelings, he just laughs in your face.
And
we have to accept the fact that the sort
of fears we have in the modern world are
both uh smaller and more complex at the
same time. Yes, they're not about life
and death, but our nervous system has
been repurposed from bears to boundaries
and it does not know the difference. It
feels like you saying your truth,
saying, "I don't think that this job's
working for me," or you said something
that doesn't land with me, and you you
crossed a line. That feels like you're
about to be rejected from the tribe,
even if the tribe is now just a WhatsApp
chat.
>> And this
repurposing of our nervous system
gives us the additional complexity of
the shame because now we feel shame.
Who am I to have this problem? Do I not
know that across the grand expanse of
history, this is nothing? My ancestors
would have dreamed to have had the
opportunity to have dealt with this
problem instead of the one that they do.
And yet, you can't deny the way that you
feel. It's like one of the biggest
lessons I've taken away from this year
is my emotions are legitimate. Like the
way that I feel is the way that I feel.
And denying myself that is not helping
anything at all. It's like you feel
scared before you go out on stage to go
and give this talk in front of a few
thousand people. You shouldn't be
scared. No one's going to come and kill
you. And you start shaming yourself for
your fear. And then you become anxious
about your shame about your fear and
then bitter about your anxiousness about
your shame about your fear. You've got
this infinite regress of mean emotions.
Like, huh?
The first one wasn't me. The first one
was the situation.
The second one was me. the third one,
the fourth one, and now I'm complicit in
my own suffering. I've made myself I've
made myself suffer unnecessarily. So,
and this is why the spit and sawdust and
caffeine and big dreams
really really important, but it has to
be married with some self- loveve. And
um maybe not in the beginning. Maybe if
you're trying to get the rocket ship off
the launch pad, use what you have,
including
your
self-hatred and your need for validation
from people and that chip on your
shoulder from the kids in school. But
after a while, you need to accept that
that is a toxic fuel if you use it for
too long. But when inertia is at its
greatest, I think you have to use what
you have.
>> I'm going to I'm going to ask you a
question, and this is a I just want to
try an experiment here. Can you think
out loud when you hear this question?
Okay.
So, I'm going to ask you immediately.
Think out loud. Okay.
Are you happy?
It's
>> complex question.
I have to work hard to be in a good mood
sometimes. And I don't like the fact
that I have to work hard to be in a good
mood. Uh it feels to me like I need to
stack the deck in my favor in order to
be able to do that. And I wish that I
didn't. And yet I'm really proud of all
of the things that I've done in order to
be able to make my my happiness
increase. I have a I have a set point. I
I had depression in my 20ies. I've had a
lot of anxiety as well and I'm really
proud of what I've done to overcome
that.
>> You have to work hard to be in a good
mood.
>> Yes.
>> Can you talk me through that? I've never
had this before from you.
>> Okay. Well, this year has been a
particularly difficult one for me
because I got kicked in the nuts by
health. America's a wonderful country,
but everything's trying to kill you. The
food system, the municipal water, the
building materials, the air quality, and
uh I lived in a house that had toxic
mold. I got mold poisoning, which a lot
of people in America have, and it's so
brutal. A ton of other stuff. And I
spent a long time, the best part of two
years, with two jobs. One was the show,
the other was trying to fix my health.
So after all of this, all this big
Modern Wisdom review thing, all I did,
my only two goals for this year at the
start of this year were don't let the
show drop and fix my health. That was
it. That was all I wanted. Nothing else.
Don't let the show drop and fix my
health. So I really was humbled, like
kicked in the nuts so many times that
they were two-dimensional. They turn
they disappeared if you looked at them
from the side. It felt like a cosmic
joke. It felt so
unfair. like working so hard to just
operate, going to bed at 7 o'clock at
night for six months, unable to sleep
because I was wired but tired because my
cortisol was inverted. Cortisol was
higher at night than it was in the
morning. So no matter how long I slept,
I was never able to feel rested in the
morning. and then dealing with it alone,
dealing with it on my own and trying to
go through complex environmental illness
doctors and treatments and all of this
stuff that really made me
face a lot of the fears of insufficiency
that I've had. I think every man knows
reflection when he's at his lowest and
I've been at some of my lowest points
over the last 12 months. So for me, the
happiness thing has been like I just
need to get through today. I just want
to perform well on the show. I can't
really think about the mood that I'm in
when I do it because the mood that I'm
in is just swimming in melancholy. I
don't feel very good. It felt like it
felt like my better self was slipping
through my fingers like it was being
ripped away from me due to
some thing that I hadn't done. It felt
so unfair, so comically unfair, like a
literally like a personal curse that had
been hit at me. And it was specifically
on the thing that I care about the most.
So mold does typically lots of things,
but three things. Uh energy, mood, and
cognition. So it makes you tired all the
time. It makes you low mood. And it
makes you forgetful. Like there was a
day when I looked down and I forgot how
to tie my shoes. Couldn't remember how
to put my shoelaces together in order to
tie my shoes. I was forgetting words.
forgetting the names of people that I'd
known, forgetting the names of like
friends, dogs and stuff that I'd spent
time with.
And um yeah, this year has not been a
year where I've been trying to maximize
my happiness. It's one where I've been
trying to sort of survive. And I did it
pretty much silently. I did a video
about it in maybe October time,
something like that. But again, my I
want to keep my private life private
thing was
important to me because I didn't want to
have other people
Being ill. Anybody that is dealing with
a an illness will know this.
Talking about your illness is kind of
like having a birthday that what you get
is inundated with lots of messages from
people who are all really well-wishing,
but what it results in is just a ton of
admin and a load of guilt if you don't
reply. So, I didn't I knew that if I
started talking about all of the stuff
that I was going through, it would be
great because it would make other people
that were dealing with it feel less
alone. But it would also be an
additional burden on me while I'm trying
to fix myself of trying to sift through
all of my friend knows how to do a
parasite cleanse using goat milk and you
can, you know, pray to the full moon.
Like, dude, I really appreciate you
caring about me so much that you've
tried to link me in with this person.
And sure enough, this documentary that I
put on the channel that people can go
and watch came out and that happened. It
mercifully I was a little bit further
through the journey. But yeah, man.
Like, how do I optimize my happiness is
a luxury that a lot of people aren't in
a position to do. And and that that was
me this year. I didn't have the spare
capacity to optimize my happiness.
>> And you still try hard to be you still
have to put significant effort in to be
content, happy.
>> Um yeah, at the moment, yeah. Uh I've
been working hard on it. You know,
happiness
really only exists when uncertainty
isn't there. It's very difficult to be
uncertain and happy at the same time.
You'd even make the argument that humans
never chase happiness directly. They
always chase certainty first because if
you don't know how the future is going
to pan out, how are you able to be h
especially if it's like chronic
uncertainty like you know severe
uncertainty, not just I don't know who's
going to win the sports game tomorrow.
And for me, I didn't know if I was going
to get escape velocity to get out of
this health stuff. And if that's the
case, where am I deriving my happiness
from? All I see is this endless stretch
of work and discomfort and fatigue and
tiredness and solitude. And I I I feel
bad for the guy that had to go through
that this year. Like I feel for him cuz
it wasn't it wasn't easy and it was
lonely. And I'm really proud. I'm really
really proud that
I kept showing up. I didn't give up on
myself. I hit dead ends with regards to
treatment, with regards to testing. It
was like months where
I was going to bed at 7:00 p.m., waking
up at
8:00 a.m., still tired, sleeping
straight through.
>> There's something interesting here
because the three areas that you said
mold impacts are also the three areas
that everybody kind of knows you for,
right?
>> And that's kind of
>> why I said personal curse. It felt like
it felt like somebody had designed
a pathology just for me and it would hit
at all of the places that I took my self
worth from.
>> Does it leave a question then which is
if you take everything I value now that
gives me selfworth,
what remains?
>> Well, that was a question I had to ask
myself this year
>> and what did remain?
>> Somebody who's kind, somebody who's
genuinely kind and uh
sensitive. And I always thought that
sensitivity was a weakness, but it's
not. At least not for me. Somebody who
is resilient
in a very normal way. So boring
victories
is something that I've had to learn to
take pleasure from this year. You know,
is today
the grandest accomplishment of your
entire life?
No. but you went for a walk or you were
kind to that person at the supermarket
or you were gentle with yourself when
you became frustrated.
And I had to get over the shame of small
pleasures that somehow me feeling proud
about the way that I showed up in a tiny
minute way that nobody else saw was sort
of a comment of the smallness of my
life. Oh, you must not have a lot going
on. Like how feeble, how weak, how
minuscule must your life be? that that
seeing that golden retriever was the
best part of your morning.
And yet I realized that that was worth
being happy about and that denying
myself the opportunity to be happy about
something small is basically me holding
my happiness hostage. Like until the
bank deposit is sufficiently large, the
ledger doesn't kick in. Like I can't
pick up pennies. I can only pick up $100
bills. And um it really [__] humbled
me, dude. Especially if you're flying
high, you know, two years ago, the show
is just vertical. And it, you know,
numerically it still is now, but it
really really felt like something had
just come in to bring my feet back down
to earth. And I feel different to the
person I was last year, but I'm much
more connected, I think, to a sort of
truth. Alander Boton says, "The best men
are those who have been broken." And
this year has definitely broken me.
>> Are you doing better now?
>> I am. Yeah, I am. Um, it's if I was at a
three 12 months ago, I'm probably at a
seven to an eight now. So, don't let the
show drop and fix my health. Like, I got
close to doing both of those. We've got
to wrap up now, but I wanted to give you
the chance to end this with any closing
thoughts that you might have for the
listener that's gotten this far in this
conversation
>> and who is really at, you know, the
foothills of potentially a new version
of themselves.
Is there anything else,
>> Chris, that you wanted to say?
>> Well, first off, congratulations for
making it through all of this. There's a
lot of uncomfortable things to face with
conversations like this. It really
forces you to reckon with parts of your
direction. You're like, [__] Like, I I
really don't want to have to have that
conversation. I really don't want to
face that thing. There's a great quote
from John Paul Sartra. He said, I've led
a toothless life. I have never bitten
into anything.
I was waiting. I was reserving myself
for later on. And I've just noticed that
my teeth have gone.
This idea of being shunted to the side
of your own life, of being a
an NPC, a non-playable character when
you should have been the main character.
uh
you can be in service of other people,
but you can still have some sort of
action that you take into the world.
This deferred life thing, waiting for
life to begin.
It's a great time of year to question
that assumption. What would have to
happen by the end of next year for you
to look back on it and consider it a
success? What would I do to make
85-year-old me miserable? What would I
what would 85-year-old me wish that I
did more of? What are the emotions I'm
unprepared to feel? What are the
thoughts that I thought too many times
last year? If this was a movie and the
audience was watching, what would they
be screaming at the screen telling me to
do with my life?
They're cool questions and uh they
certainly helped me. They helped me find
direction. So, I hope they've helped
everyone else as well.
We have a closing tradition where the
last guest leaves a question for the
next, not knowing who they're leaving it
for. And the question left for you is
quite relevant. What is the most
important component of human joy and
endeavor that you believe must be
preserved in priority?
Oh, wonderful.
[sighs and gasps]
I think agency
I think the belief that you have
the ability to impact your surroundings.
Uh because the opposite of agency is you
basically holding your hands up and
saying, "I'm at the mercy of the world.
You happen to life. Life doesn't happen
to you."
Chris, thank you. You are going on tour
and uh you're going on tour next year in
March, I believe. And you're going in on
tour in an area where I know we have
lots of listeners,
>> Australia, New Zealand, Bali.
>> So, I'm going to link below a link to
anyone that wants to come see you on
tour,
>> but [snorts] also highly recommend
people go download the the modern wisdom
annual review template. So, I'm going to
link that below as well. Look in the
description. It's all there.
>> Is there anything else that if people,
you know, your channel, people should go
subscribe to your channel if they've
liked what they've heard today. Is there
anything else?
>> I had a conversation with Naval
Ravocant.
>> Oh my god, I love that.
>> It's the people always ask like, "What's
the best conversation you've ever had?"
And I say, "It's like trying to choose
between a thousand children." Um, that
was really special. And for people who
know him, you should watch it again.
>> For people who don't know him, you
should go and check it out. So, we can
link that below. I highly recommend
that. Yeah. Honestly, the modern wisdom
manual review template, it's free. Copy
it, use it, and um that'll put you on my
mailing list for a once a week
newsletter, which is a lot of the
thoughts, a lot of the ideas that we've
gone through today. I wanted to uh say
something to you before we finished up
as well.
>> Um, no, it's a it's a thank you. So, uh
I think people often wonder about what's
going on behind the scenes or what
somebody's like behind the scenes. And,
uh I had a I needed some advice from
you. So, I messaged you on a Saturday
afternoon on WhatsApp and within 30
seconds, you rang me and then put me in
a group with like the guy that was able
to help with this thing and then
basically sort of carried us through
this process for the next couple of
weeks and kept checking in with me.
That was that was very very meaningful
and you didn't need to do it. And uh I
very much appreciate having you. I mean
you you in my phone book is like a
[__] hidden weapon. you're kind of
like the jocker willing to be able to
get, you know, stuff sorted. But uh I
just wanted to say thank you for that
cuz it was it was really really kind and
um yeah, it's it's awesome to feel like
people have got your back and that made
me feel like that.
>> I appreciate that. Um yeah, you've
earned that because you you've done so
much for so many other people and you've
been so selfless in a way that I aspire
to be. Like I'm not very good at like
staying in touch and connecting and
replying and stuff like that, but in
those particular moments, you know, I
think we are a team. [laughter]
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> So, uh, so I appreciate that. Thank you
so much.
>> Thank you, mate. [music]
>> This is something that I've made for
you. I realized that the direio audience
are striv
goals that we want to accomplish. And
one of the things I've learned is that
when you aim at the big big big goal, it
can feel incredibly psychologically
uncomfortable because it's kind of like
being stood at the foot of Mount Everest
and looking upwards. The way to
accomplish your goals is by breaking
them down into tiny small steps. And we
call this in our team the 1%. And
actually this philosophy is highly
responsible for much of our success
here. So what we've done so that you at
home can accomplish any big goal that
you have is we've made these 1% diaries
and we released these last year and they
all sold out. So I asked my team over
and over again to bring the diaries back
but also to introduce some new colors
and to make some minor tweaks to the
diary. So now we have a better range for
you. So, if you have a big goal in mind
and you need a framework and a process
and some motivation, then I highly
recommend you get one of these diaries
before they all sell out once again. And
you can get yours now at the diary.com
where you can get 20% off our Black
Friday bundle. And if you want the link,
the link is in the description below.
[music]
>> [music]
[singing]